Grade 1
#1
During the coming week you should think constantly about these three simple Principles and put them into practise all the time. You will be surprised to note how difficult it will be when you try to apply these Laws to all the various acts of your life during each day of this first week of your studies. Remember: Peace — Power — Secrecy!! Peace of your mind which will spread through your body. Power by combination of your faculties with those of your friends who truly harmonise with you and with your other friends whom you may deem worthy of being trusted with the news about our Order. Secrecy as far as the outer world is concerned, for the man who has a secret and knows how to guard it has added power unto himself, for if this secret is of a high moral and intellectual nature he will be superior (and therefore more powerful) to the man who has not that secret knowledge. Peace added to the powers of combination and secrecy increases the potency of both, which again will re-act on the state of balance of your inner faculties.
Thus you will find that these three principles will constantly grow and become more potent within you, and the result will be that in a week from now your whole personality will take on a new tone, a new vitality, and you will have a brighter outlook upon life in general. You will become an influence for good to those around you on account of the greater amount of Universal Force that can now flow through you more freely and pass on from yourself to those whom you may contact daily. But you must give all your attention and endeavours to this first exercise unceasingly during this week. Please make a note of your experiences and write to us when you have completed the work of the first month. Do this always in future if you have anything to report. 
#2

How then can we obtain that much desired control of self, you will ask? We can still our minds by isolating ourselves in some way most suitable to each and by entering into a condition of Silence. We may go into a park, or into the country if we can for an hour or for any time we can spare, and in that place — wherever it is — we can quieten our thoughts and think of anything that we, each in a different manner, consider the most ideal conception of really peaceful conditions and attitudes of mind. We can go to a museum or Art Gallery, or even stand in front of a shop window containing any sort of thing we consider beautiful. We can sink our outer personality and our inner thoughts to the point of utter forgetfulness of self into such things that appeal most to us on account of the splendour which is contained in any form of art, in jewellery, in a lovely rose, or any other flower, in the grace that abounds in a bird or a young animal, a sunrise, a sunset, a moonlit sky, or anything else you may think beautiful. Then we must carry away with us the picture of that particular thing or being and keep it in our mind. We must think of it from time to time, see it again with the mind's eye, and recall the pleasure and the Peace it gave us when we first beheld it. This is a very simple exercise which we can practise almost anywhere and at any time, and it will be of great benefit to us in many ways. Not only shall we thus learn to attain to a peaceful condition of mind, but we shall also raise our thoughts to a level above the ordinary material things of life. Without realising it at first, we shall take the first step towards the spiritual, for beauty in any form is always a material reflection of a spiritually ideal proto-type, which exists in a realm of less density than the earthly, dense, material plane in which we are dwelling at present; prisoners anxious to escape, whether we are aware of it or not.
But we must not become dreamers on account of our efforts to pacify our minds by trying to raise it a step above ordinary life. It is essential that we learn to understand the beautiful and peaceful conditions of a higher world and yet retain our grip on the conditions of earthly life in which we have been placed in order to learn certain material things and to carry out certain duties to ourselves and others. We can do this if we practise it continually, and this endeavour will bring a feeling of joy as well as Peace and a proper appreciation of beauty. You see — the principle of Peace is beginning to expand already into other good things! And when we begin to obtain that grip we have just mentioned our sense of Power will increase at the same time. 

#3

We will now give you some suggestions for a new exercise, but you must continue to concentrate on Peace, Power and Secrecy in the meanwhile. The new exercise in question is the following: Go into a dark room when all is quiet and you cannot be disturbed by undue noise or movements, and at a time when nobody will come to interrupt you. Concentrate on Peace. Then close your eyes and try to see a colour with your eyes closed. You may commence with any colour you wish, but it is best to concentrate first on red, blue or yellow. Try to remember and see an article you know well with these colours. For red you may choose a tomato for instance, for blue the colour of the sky at noon when there are no clouds, and for yellow a lemon. You have seen these colours thousands of times in connection with the things mentioned. Think hard of them, one at a time. If you really are at Peace within and of a tranquil mind, and if you concentrate well you will suddenly see the thing you have in mind before you, or if not the thing itself, then its colour. Do not jump from one colour or article to another, but adhere to one only until you succeed. Fifteen minutes at a time will be sufficient.
Suppose you commence with red and you cannot visualise it. Should this be the case, then, after your 15 minutes of concentration are over without any result, you should light a candle and place it three or four inches away from and in front of a piece of material of the same colour you have been trying to see in the dark, or of a similar colour. Coloured card is best for this purpose, and it can be obtained cheaply in many tints. Have the card, or whatever it is you are using, standing upright on a chair, or a table, leaning against a picture or a mirror, or anything else handy, with the lighted candle in front of you. Whatever colour you are practising on, you will see that between the material and the candle flame there will form a purplish haze; this haze may be seen around the flame of the candle too. Look at the coloured material behind the candle and concentrate on its colour for about three or five minutes. (Be careful that you do not place the candle too near the material so that you set it alight if there should be a draught). Now snuff (don't blow) out the candle. Close your eyes again, and in nine cases out of ten you will see the colour you could not obtain before in this way. Do not worry if the colour of the material seems to change to purple, mauve or violet during the time you have the candle alight. Should you still have difficulties and fail to visualise the colour you want to see, do the same thing the next night, and so on until you succeed. Once you can see the first colour at will in the dark you will find it easy to see the others. Do NOT practise seeing any colours just before you are going to sleep until we give you further instructions, for it might be dangerous. Colour vibrations are the means of attunement with other conditions than the one you dwell in during your conscious daily life. If you attune with colours without knowing what you are about you might (if you do it in bed before sleeping) attune with something undesirable. So be careful please, and never forget these instructions. You will be good enough to practise this exercise as often as you can until the end of the 13th lecture. Then — as you will have finished your third step in this Grade — you will be so kind as to give us a report of your success or otherwise in regard to this exercise. Please read over this lecture several times if needed, so that you will have all the details firmly fixed in your mind. This exercise is of the very greatest importance if you wish to develop your powers. You will need these powers of seeing later on. It is quite useless to attempt further exercises for development if you cannot perfect this first one, for all depends upon your success with it. 

#4

We can say by way of illustration that Matter is a lower octave of Spirit. It reflects a higher octave and rings with it in sympathy, just as a note struck on a piano, when you press down the loud pedal with your foot and keep it down, will cause its higher and lower harmonics to sound forth. These harmonics, especially the higher ones, can be heard by anyone who takes the trouble to try the experiment and who listens by tuning his ear to the interior part of the piano whilst holding down the note struck with his finger and the loud pedal with his foot. First you will detect the harmonic note an octave above the pitch of the note you have struck, then the one a fifth above the octave, and so on until the sounds are lost in the highest realms and cannot be followed by the sense of hearing any further.
Here you have a good exercise for developing your sense of hearing. Nearly everyone has access to a piano in some way if he really tries. If you do not, any instrument with strings that vibrates will do just as well, such as a second-hand acoustic guitar. Add this exercise to the one we gave you last week on seeing; the two exercises go well together and the last one is just as important for the development of your faculties as the one last week.
Are you now beginning to see the drift of our present Studies? Are you beginning to realise how we propose to lead you from the middle region (the earth) to the higher Realms? Can you see the implied suggestions with regard to the lower regions? There is much food for deep thought in all this, and if you are what we hope you are, you will have in this tenth week of your studies already a great revelation; such a revelation as you have never thought of before in all probability. It is this, and other revelations of a very high nature, that will lead to your eventual Illumination!! And there is no other Order in the world today that can teach you this Ancient Wisdom in the same manner that we teach it. This is said with the deepest sense of humility and it is not to be regarded as an idle boast or a cheap form of advertisement. 

#5

We will now extend the colour exercise, you have been practising for several weeks, a little.
Light a candle in a dark room, and place it in front of the centre of a mirror on a level with your eyes. Seat yourself about four feet away from the candle, relax entirely and look steadily at the flame. When we say 'look at the flame' we mean that you should not strain your eyes in any way. The best thing is to have them half-closed and completely relaxed also. You know that the eyes are only lenses which send to the centre of vision within your brain a picture of that which is before you, according to the way your mind interprets that picture. We will not go into the technicalities of sight yet, for that is not necessary at this stage of our studies.
Instead of straining your eyes when you look at the candle flame you should try to look at the candle from the back of your head, as it were, if we may put it thus crudely. If you watch carefully what happens inside your head when you look at anything you will (if you are really relaxed), be able to feel or sense the actual spot within the brain where the seat of vision is placed. Try this before you look at the candle flame. If you cannot locate the spot at once try for several days, as many days as possible, to find that spot. When you have located it (which really should not be difficult) practise looking with that spot, and not with the eyes. This may seem a very daft way of looking at anything, but we assure you that it is necessary to learn the technique, and we hope we have made ourselves understood.
When you have mastered the technique of 'looking from the back of the head' (though in a forward direction of course, and not looking out of the back of your head backwards!), then look at the candle flame, around which you will see a halo. Practise this exercise with any light you see anywhere, without making yourself conspicuous. Try it with street lamps, electric lights, the moon; with anything that is alight, and try to see the halo around all such illuminations. When you have done this for some time, and you can see it under all conditions, you will note that these halos contain all the colours of the rainbow, or most of those of the spectrum. When you can see all these colours in their proper order (as in the rainbow), then, and not before, you may try to project from your mind any colour you wish towards such a halo, so that it will take on, if you are successful, that colour which you have first fixed upon in your mind, and which by an act of your will can be sent towards these halos. If there are two of you who can practise this together you should sit about six feet away from the candle in such a way that you form a triangle, with the candle at its apex. If one of you projects blue to the flame and the other red, you will see that the outsides of the flame take on these two colours — one on each side — whereas the centre of the flame (which is facing you both, more or less) becomes purple. This is proof that the changing colour of the candle's halo, or aura, is not due to your imagination, but that it is a fact. You can try any two colours in this way, and the third will always be seen in the centre of the flame as a combination of the two.
We have no doubt that you will be able to vary this exercise in many ways, for the possible variations are almost endless, and we want you — if you will co-operate with us — to try this if you can. Groups of three, seven, or twelve can produce some very spectacular effects in this way, and have done so in the past on many occasions. This will be, to you, a new and expert method of demonstrating to yourself a Principle which generally fails in other Orders when they do not know the real technique of this experiment. You should carry on with this exercise for the next four weeks, and then report to us on your progress.
The exercise on hearing is more subtle, and you must carry on with this for another four weeks as well, trying to hear higher and higher overtones as they fade away into the upper regions of sound. This is very difficult and you will have to practise it for a long time before you begin to see and hear any extraordinary results; it is a unique form of attunement, as you may have realised already. But remember please, that it is extremely important, for it forms a ladder to Heaven, as it were, in the end. There is one slight extension we will give you now in regard to the 'hearing exercise.
When you have struck your note (holding down the loud pedal with your foot and the note struck with your finger), close your eyes and endeavour to see the colours of the overtones. They will become visible to you as a rapidly changing series of tiny fiery specks in different colours; each speck representing the colour of an overtone. When you have developed this, in a few weeks time, you will be delighted with the magnificent display of fairy fireworks you will behold. This is the first allusion to a Law which will be explained later. On each different note there is a different series of overtones, and an entirely different and distinct series or range of colours, made visible to you in the form of these tiny specks. It is very fascinating once you can do it, and it helps to develop certain of your inner centres. Whatever you see or hear: keep calm and full of Peace; this is essential. Please do not treat any of these exercises lightly, for they are of the utmost
importance; they are not given to keep you busy, or to prevent you from asking too many awkward questions. They are for the purpose of preparing you for the development of the Greater Powers within yourself, which at present are lying dormant. 

#6

A vessel holding a cubic foot will contain 9/100ths of an ounce of hydrogen at atmospheric pressure - a little less than a tenth of an ounce. In this small mass of gas there are about three-quarters of a quadrillion molecules.
To reduce the pressure to a millionth of an atmosphere requires a very good air pump. Such a pressure would support only 3/100,000ths of an inch of mercury, instead of the usual 30 inches. To get such a vacuum we have to pump out all but a millionth of the gas molecules.
There still remain, however, three quarters of a trillion molecules (75" or 75 followed by 16 noughts). These molecules have a hundred times as much space in which to jerk to and fro than before the pumping. The average space between them is only about a millionth of an inch. To reduce the pressure to a thousand-millionth of an atmosphere we have to pump out all but a thousandth of the very tenuous gas left in the vessel. The traces of gas still left fill the vessel just as much as the dense gas filled it before the pumping began. There are still 750 billion molecules left, and the spaces between them are a 100,000th of an inch. Try to imagine these multitudes within that small space of one cubic foot; it will be a good exercise for you. 

#7

In our last lecture we have discussed an easy way of extending your Consciousness to Higher Realms. You will understand that we are gradually introducing the Principle in question, and we want to say now that in time to come we will add new ways of learning the way of escape from the material, so that you should not be under the impression that the last word has been said about it already. Far from it: there are many revelations to come in this direction. You will remember that we have so often insisted on the importance of Peace, Power and Secrecy. When you eventually attain the Secret Power of Peace, you will then have learned also how to relax. To relax is very easy to some people; to many others it is very difficult, and we have as yet given you no exercises which will lead to a completely relaxed condition; for you cannot relax properly unless you are at Peace first.
To be at Peace, real Peace, is one of the most difficult things to acquire — that is why we commenced our very first lecture with it, so that you should have plenty of time to learn to be at Peace before you come to the more intricate exercises. Why should we commence with the most difficult thing first, you may ask; why did we not give you some easier exercises first which would lead up gradually to that difficult attainment?
Many, many years ago we knew a young violinist who was forced to learn to play the violin against his will or inclination, although he was a great lover of music since he was but a little child. The practising of many finger and other exercises which were needed to develop the various muscles used in the mastering of that most difficult of all musical instruments, bored him to tears. He therefore invented a method of learning to play the violin all his own. He managed to get hold of some of the most difficult studies, virtuoso pieces and concertos it was possible to find, and he started to practise those in secret. In a remarkably short time he astounded his teacher by being able to play any piece of violin music that was placed before him, much to his own secret delight. Although he had of course, not sufficient technique or musicianship to play the works he was practising by himself in any way near perfection, yet he had acquired in a very short time, a much wider outlook musically than he could have had if he had gone through the ordinary drudgery of early violin exercises. Not only that, but he acquired an actual interest in his studies, for he could now see possibilities which are hidden from the average beginner. He was no longer bored to death, but kept on assiduously with his secret practising and ended up as a really brilliant and well-known soloist in the end, and became a fine musician in every way. We can vouch for me truth of this story, for we knew him quite well, and he has often talked to the present writer with amusement about his 'daft' way of learns to become a virtuoso.
Now we have followed a similar system in the course of our lectures, although not in imitation, and it has never failed yet. We have not bored you to death with all sorts of elementary trash, but have trusted to your intelligence and perseverance by starting you off with that which is the most difficult thing in the whole range of Occult Study — to become able to be really at Peace within, whenever outside conditions seem to become overwhelming in their complications.
We have also given you a great test in this way, which will show us the latent talents you may have in the way of spiritual development.
If during those 23 weeks you have succeeded in mastering the technique you have produced a Miracle which not one person in a hundred thousand, or we might say without exaggeration, one in a million, could achieve. If you have not succeeded at all times in getting sufficient command of all your inner faculties to be at Peace whenever you wish — then carry on trying. You will succeed in the end if you persevere, and then your Secret Power will be very great indeed, and you will influence and master all those with whom you come in contact in your daily life.
And now we will give you one bit of advice which will help you to attain that inner Peace; you must see that you are completely relaxed before you concentrate on Peace. This is not easy, for you will find by observation that there is always some part of your body which is unrelaxed or tense in some way; especially when you are sitting down or leaning against some object. The best way to learn to relax is to lie down on a comfortable bed, but see that you do not fall asleep!! Watch all your muscles in every part of your body mentally. There should be a complete feeling of 'deadness' everywhere, and it should be quite an effort to move or raise any of your limbs or your head. This applies to the whole of your body. If you are lying with your head on a pillow or cushion which makes it necessary to stretch your neck or throat muscles in any way you are not relaxed, even if everything else feels at ease. If there is any feeling of tightness about the back or chest, or if anything presses anywhere against your body you are not relaxed. You must become a dead weight in every sense of the word; like a bag of sand, or a sack of potatoes, if the simile does not offend your susceptibilities (if it does you are not at Peace within either, for an Occult student should be above such trifles). Even your mind must be relaxed, and you must cease to think or worry about anything especially yourself, and still more so when once you are satisfied that your body is properly relaxed at last.
This is a very important exercise!!
Watch out and see what happens to you (without straining your mind or trying to see or hear anything whatsoever) when once you have succeeded in that complete and utter relaxation of body and mind, and report to us after the 26th lecture, which is the end of this step in the present grade and is the completion of the second triangle of the first grade. We shall not give you any hints as to what you may expect, for it will be different for each student. We ask you to carry on also with the rest of the exercises and report progress at the same time, for we consider the completion of the first two triangles a very important stage in your development. 

#8

Your Teachers consider that the time is now ripe for developing the Meditation exercise a little further. Before you commence your future meditations take a candle, light it, and place it on your left-hand side before a mirror in front of which you should be seated comfortably. You should sit about two or three feet away from the mirror, and the candle should be placed in such a manner that it stands three inches away from the mirror surface and approximately in a straight line with the outside edge of your left shoulder as shown in the diagram below:
 
The candle should be reflected in the mirror, but the main thing is to place it in such a way that the mirror surface in front of you is completely free from anything that might prevent you from looking into it. Look at your own face as you sit in front of the mirror, and keep your eyes steadily fixed at one point of your reflection. You may look at the point just between your eyes above the nose, or concentrate your gaze directly at one of your eyes, taking care that you do not continually shift your gaze from one eye to the other, in other words: look with one eye at one spot only, for if you try it you will see that, although both your eyes are open, only one of them is actually focussed on one spot at the time. If you close one eye and fix the other at one spot, and then close that eye suddenly and open the other, without shifting the first focus, you will see what we mean; for you will find that the eye that was first closed does not now see the same spot as the other; it is actually focussed elsewhere! In ordinary ways the eyes shift their focus continually with most persons; there are very few who have a fixed gaze, for if they always fixed their eyes in the way we need it for concentration exercises they would soon seem to be staring. But you must avoid that also, for if you stared there would be stress, and we must learn to fix our gaze and relax at the same time.
You may look anywhere you like so far as your features are concerned, you may look at the tip of your nose (that is to say the tip of the nose in the mirror) or at one eyebrow; but remember that once you have selected a certain spot, that you stick to it for the rest of your meditation as much as possible. This is very difficult and needs intense concentration, as you will find; remember also to look from the back of your head, as we told you before.
This is the first of an important series of exercises, known as ‘mirror practise'. We had no intention at first to give you this exercise in the First Grade, but as the progress of our Students has been so uniformly excellent we have advanced this mirror practise a little as a token of our appreciation of the seriousness and sincerity evinced by our Students of this Grade.
One quarter-of-an-hour of this new sort of meditation will be sufficient for the first month, whenever you can find the time and opportunity to practise it. After you have done this for six weeks you should write to us and tell us what results you have obtained. We are not going to give you any hints as to what you might expect, for that would prejudice you in favour of such statements. Here again, it will be different for each individual, but we should like a report in this instance. Please make notes after each experiment, and keep the notes, so that you may refer to them when you write to us, and then select those experiences which you consider most important. 
Grade 2

#9

In the meantime we will give you a further exercise in connection with meditation and the gradual development of your inner centres and Principles. It is as follows: when you have uttered your usual prayer and relaxed your Higher and lower Minds as instructed in the First Grade, you should imagine in the inmost centre of your being (it would be good and safe if you imagined this centre as being situated within your heart) a tiny pinpoint of consciousness filled with Light. You may call this the Christ-consciousness if you wish, but its name does not matter. Concentrate on this pinpoint until you not only sense, but see it with your eyes closed and their gaze turned inwards as it were.
When you have succeeded in doing this, and after your colour exercises it should not be too difficult, you should imagine this point to be the centre too of anything you wish to be enlightened upon; on any problem you have. When that is done you must try to make the pinpoint grow in size, so that it becomes at first a tiny light or flame of white or gold, and later on grows to a definite Beacon of Light. You have this Light within you already; you are not creating, imaging or imagining it; for it is the inner Spark which is always in direct contact with your own Soul, Higher Self, or Ego. You should try to focus all your faculties of the Higher Mind upon this pinpoint, or on the flame when later on you succeed in seeing it, and it will act as a carrier which will take your inner consciousness outward to the Higher Realms, or inward to the same; for there are two ways of approach to them in this manner.
Do not overdo this exercise, but go easy with it. Fifteen minutes at a time, two or three times a week is ample at first. Do not strain any of your faculties, but remain relaxed in every way. If you fall asleep it does not matter, but try to keep awake if you can. Do not forget your prayer for guidance and protection!!
Before you commence arrange with yourself upon what you are going to meditate. Remember too that within the heart, the aorta, is placed a sacred centre which can be developed in everyone and set ablaze with splendour. The rays of that flame shoot outwards and in front of your body in a straight beam; but the real beacon remains inside. Here is one explanation of the two ways of approach we mentioned just now. Such a centre is called a chakram, and there are seven such chakras within the human body. The one we are now concerned with is the cardiac chakram or the Anahita; it is the fourth, or central one, and this is one of the reasons why we commence with it; the second reason is that it is the safest to commence with. By this we do not mean that the others are dangerous!
This exercise is optional, of course, the same as any others we give you. We shall develop the teachings of the chakras from time to time, but in the meanwhile we must return to our studies of vibration and motion which we left off towards the end of the First Grade, and to a further study of the Sun. 

#10

Before we go any further we must give you an additional candle- exercise in connection with Motion. Place a lighted candle in front of a mirror, right in the centre of it and about three inches away from it. Sit two or three feet away from the candle and right in front of it. Relax. Concentrate on the candle's aura. It is not necessary to change its colour, for it contains all the colours of the rainbow or spectrum in their proper order in any case. When you see the aura properly, will it to rotate round the flame. You can achieve this rotation if you first of all fix your gaze - from the back of the head of course
upon one spot on the outside rim of the aura, and direct the gaze slowly around it in an anti-clockwise direction. As soon as the aura commences to turn, hold your gaze steadily fixed on the flame itself. If you have followed our instructions properly and conditions are good you will see the continuous circular movement of the aura. After, say, 30 seconds or even a minute, will it to stop. Then, will it to revolve clockwise, but hold your gaze steadily fixed on the flame this time. After you have tried this exercise a dozen times you will find that you need not set the aura in motion yourself, but that it will rotate in either of the two
directions at your mental command. This is an excellent concentration exercise, which will be developed later in connection with other Laws. Please keep on working away at all your other meditation and concentration exercises as well. The above test will also prove to you that mind can control matter, for the aura is matter in an etherealised form; though still earthly. 

#11

A person of vivid imagination suffers acutely from the imagination of perils besetting a friend. In fact in some cases the ideal construction is so 'real' that specific physical manifestations occur, as though imagination had passed into belief, or the events imagined were actually in progress. And it is against this sort of imagination we must be on our guard at all times. For it is possible to create the very conditions of peril and danger we wish to avoid on behalf of our friend; though it is not always probable that our imagination is strong enough to make these thought-forms become active objectively. Such kinds of imagination are caused by fear; therefore they are negative, destructive, and cannot reach positive actuality. If, on the other hand, we really conjecture or know that our friend might be in peril, we can help him by imagining first, and imaging afterwards conditions of safety, happiness, protection and well-being. This is one aspect or example of how to control imagination.
But to make such protection really effective you should after you have succeeded in imaging the picture of your friend in a condition of safety - project into it from your Higher Mind the pin-point of Light we told you about previously in Lecture number 2 of this Grade. When this is done make it grow if you can, until it illumines the scene you have created by imaging your imaginatory picture. There is only one way by which you can make sure that you have made a true image, and that is to be able to see the scene with closed eyes, as we told you to see colours. You may be able to see the scene as if it were painted upon your eyelids; you may actually penetrate that scene conjured up by your imagination and fixed by imaging; it all depends upon your natural gifts, developed by the previously given exercises. Needless to say, you should be completely at Peace and fully relaxed.
If you are successful with this exercise the whole picture may eventually change completely, until you have actually projected to your friend by extending your consciousness to the place where he is at the moment. But do not try to do so; it must come of its own accord. Should the image (once you have produced it) become dark or even black, that means that there is a barrier around your friend which you must not try to penetrate. There are times in the life of all of us when we wish to be entirely private; no matter what the reason for this may be. In such cases it would be a very wrong action if we tried to break in upon the privacy of any one. It is strictly forbidden, and if by any chance we should succeed in forcing our way in (which is most unlikely, however), then the punishment follows swiftly, in that all our powers of seeing clairvoyantly, or of projection or extension of consciousness, are taken away from us for the rest of this incarnation, and sometimes even for many incarnations. We then find ourselves surrounded at all times by a thick, though invisible wall or curtain which nothing can penetrate. We have become outcasts, and must dwell in darkness after that for a time. This is an unalterable and wise as well as just Occult Law, and it is well that you should know of its existence. Not only will you be unable to pass this barrier in future, but, should you ever be in trouble of any sort in future, and need protection from others yourself, then, whoever may try to help you will be unable to reach you either on account of that wall. Furthermore, if such a person should at any time be in such a condition of mind that he entertains feelings of hatred or ill-will towards others, such thoughts, which under normal conditions might be lost and dissolved in space, will turn upon him with trebled force and rend him; thus many people have destroyed themselves in their ignorance. 

#12

We want you to realise that, in the matter of healing, you are simply making yourself a transmitter for Cosmic Forces. You can picture yourself as being something in the nature of a radio where your lungs act as an aerial and your feet make earth contact, and unless you are able to definitely 'tune in', your measure of success will be small.
We shall first give you the outline of some treatments you can try out on yourself.
Exercise 1. If you have pain or discomfort in any part of your body, sit down or lie down, and thoroughly relax. Concentrate on that particular spot where the pain is, until the rest of your body has disappeared from your consciousness and you can feel every detail of the part you are concentrating on. Then take a deep breath, hold it for about a minute, and then slowly exhale. Do this three or four times and you will find considerable relief.
The Blood is of vital importance in the maintenance of health, and by adding to the vibratory powers of the blood cells an extra amount of energy is brought to the diseased part. Whether you have a pain or not this treatment can be tested out on any part of your body. Next time you visit the dentist, we suggest you concentrate on one of your toes, so that you lose consciousness of the work in hand!!
Exercise 2. If you have a headache or neuralgia, sit down and relax. Plant your feet firmly on the ground and then place the first two fingers of your right hand against your right temple, and the first two fingers of your left hand against your left temple. Take a deep breath, hold it and then slowly exhale. Repeat three or four times. Remain relaxed and quiet for awhile. There should be considerable relief in about 10 minutes or sooner.
Exercise 3. If you feel devitalised, cold or are in the company of someone who has thoroughly tired you out, sit down, place your feet firmly on the ground with ankles close together. Put the tips of your ten fingers together and do the same breathing exercise as mentioned in the last treatment. In a few minutes you will notice that the palms of your hands are getting warm. When you have finished taking deep breaths, and resumed your normal breathing, continue to keep your fingers together for awhile and you will experience a considerable increase in vitality. As vital force is always leaving your body by the extremities, by putting your feet together and closing your finger terminals you prevent this force from escaping.
Before giving treatment to other people, clear your lungs of any stale air, by means of a few good long breaths; be especially careful to exhale to the limit with a considerable amount of force. While you do this, relax mentally and endeavour to raise your consciousness away from the material world. Exercise 3 will help to make your hands more sensitive and when you feel a tingling in your fingers you are ready to start giving a treatment. 

#13

The first part of the query is: "how do you know?" This is very easily answered, for we your Teachers and Heads of The Order know by experience. "Very well", you might retort, "but how are you going to prove it?" Again the reply is very easy; we shall not have to prove it at all - for you yourself will prove it to yourself as soon as you have acquired the necessary technique, and this you can do in one way or another (each person differently) if you practise our exercises and meditations persistently, without putting up the smoke-screen of doubt and unbelief each time you obtain a glimpse of that which lies beyond the material veils and barriers. We are glad to say that a goodly number of our students have seen beyond the veil already on many occasions during the last two years with us. Some came to us with their clairvoyant and clairaudient faculties already developed to a lesser or greater extent. Others knew nothing at all of these things but have since learnt certain important laws, and have had certain personal experiences. Some have parted the veils by means of the colour and sound exercises; others were successful on account of their concentration on the candle and other auras; yet others saw 'through the mirror' (Lecture 47 of Grade 1), or obtained views by means of meditation and deep concentration. There have been some who were successful by raising their faculties of thinking; others by 'losing themselves' in the contemplation of beauty, natural or otherwise, and by concentrating their sight on a beautiful and sparkling jewel - which is another means of 'escape'.
All had different experiences and saw and heard different things. The reading of really fine literature, poetry or prose, also helps, and there are as many ways of escape to the Higher Realms as there are persons who are sufficiently evolved to have earned that great privilege and blessing. Now what did they see in those Regions; and what have we ourselves beheld in them? We are not going to reveal this here, for we shall do better still if we sit at the feet of the great and often unknown Sages of Antiquity, and listen to their Wisdom in preference to ours; thus cutting out the personal element as far as The Order is concerned for that is ever our foremost and greatest Principle. It would be easy to dazzle you with many wonderful stories of our experiences, but we think that you will agree with our decision not to do so. 

Grade 3 

#14

But Chaos before, Aether after this 'reflection', it is still the Deity that pervades Space and all things. Called in derision by the Marquis de Mirville, the "Nebulous Almighty", it is to this day termed by the Theurgists and Occultists the 'Living Fire'; and there is not a Hindu who practises at dawn a certain kind of meditation but knows its effects. And in this appellation of 'Living Fire' we may also discover the meaning of the puzzling sentence in the Zend Avesta which states that there is "a Fire that gives knowledge of the future, science and amiable speech"; that is to say, which develops an extraordinary eloquence in the Sybil, the sensitive, and even in some orators.
And in connection with this you should if you wish - sit in meditation each morning at dawn (or as many mornings as you can), and, before sitting down, you should stand upright, head bowed, hands crossed over the breast and resting on the shoulders, and when the Sun's rim becomes visible over the horizon you should salute the East by saying:
"Hail to the East, domain and Source of Wisdom; Hail to the Sons of Light and Wisdom; may their divine protecting hands be stretched over me and guide me to Good; may their divine effulgence and Love pervade all my being with right thinking and right conduct. Amen, Amen, Amen".
Then bow three times to the East and sit down, facing the East, feeling quite comfortable and making still your Mind by the Power of Peace, so that Wisdom, Goodness and Love can flow into you and raise
up your Higher Mind until it contacts the Source of All. You will find this exercise very beneficial in many ways, and the effort is extremely worth while. 

#15

The next centre we shall therefore concentrate upon is the solar plexus, situated in the neighbourhood of the navel. Whereas the Heart Centre is of a glowing golden colour, the solar plexus has a curious blending of several shades of red, although there is a good deal of green in it as well. It is in ten divisions, which are alternately chiefly red and chiefly green. Like the heart centre which is divided in twelve parts, four parts of three divisions the solar plexus is shaped like a wheel; and this is the shape of each of the seven centres. The solar plexus is very closely associated with feelings and emotions of diverse kinds. Meditate on this centre in the same manner as you did on the heart and report in four weeks time, if you will. The purpose of these meditations is to set these wheels in quicker motion, increasing their rotation, power and colours, and giving greater freedom to the inner senses.
But we must here warn you very seriously about your meditations on this centre. Do not do it for more than about three minutes, twice a week, and if these meditations should bring about any signs of indigestion, sickness or discomfort....stop the exercise at once and write to us. There are not many persons who can do this meditation, but we should like to know if there are students among us who can. If you feel that you would rather not take this meditation, that will be quite in order; for you are a free agent in this as in all else. Do not forget your prayer for protection before and after this meditation!! Also be absolutely at Peace before you commence. When this particular centre comes into activity, one becomes more conscious of all kinds of Astral influences and beings, both pleasant and unpleasant. Unless the student has great courage and a steady mind and powerful will, this awareness might cause fright. With the Heart centre it is different; for when that is awakened it will bring one in closer touch and sympathy with other human beings, and with the knowledge our students have been accumulating this sympathy will make it possible to help others in a practical manner, on the lines of Lecture 14 of Grade 1. We have taken the Solar Plexus at this time of our studies in order to warn you of the dangers connected with it. There are a great many systems of so-called 'psychic' development that include exercises etc., in connection with the solar plexus. Avoid all such things as you would the plague; and we are not exaggerating when we say this. We shall soon give you further instructions regarding the centres, but if you feel the slightest apprehension about the present one, please pass it by.
This is a most serious warning!! 

#16

While you are doing the meditations on the Solar Plexus passing them by after what we said about this centre in our previous lecture we will now add another exercise that will tone up your system in a definite manner.
Lie down comfortably on a bed or divan, completely relaxed, and make your mind a complete blank. Then concentrate all your thought on your feet. Visualise them within and without, and try to picture to yourself every bone, sinew and muscle within them. After a short time you will note that your feet begin to tingle; when that happens pass on your thoughts to your ankles. The tingling is caused by the blood rushing to the place upon which you are concentrating, thus refreshing it and toning it up in a very decided manner. After the ankles begin to feel 'alive', pass upwards to the calves, the knees, the thighs, then to the hips - outwardly; then to the stomach, the heart, the lungs, the upper part of the chest and the shoulders. Miss the navel region with the Solar Plexus completely. This is the reason why we advise you to pass on outwards from thighs to stomach. After the shoulders, start on the fingertips, hands, wrists, arms, up to the shoulders; thence to the neck and throat ever visualising them in full detail as far as you can then the jaws, tongue, gums, ears, eyes, forehead, brain and the back of the head, until you reach the top of the skull and allow your forces of concentration to pass out through it in an upward direction as soon as you feel the same tingling, or when your inner mind tells you to do so. You can do this exercise when retiring for the night; but do not be surprised if you fall into a healthy and sound sleep before you are halfway through! You can also do this exercise when you are sitting in a bus, tube or train, or anywhere else when you have the chance. You cannot do it too often, and it will never harm you in any way!
You can make the effects still more stimulating if you take a deep breath and hold it as long as you can with each section of the body upon which you are concentrating. After slowly exhaling, take several normal breaths before you hold the breath again. This is important, for if you hold your breath several consecutive times you slow down the heart action too much, and it might also affect the lungs to an undesirable extent. Please do not forget this.....for your own sake. We know of several cases where people have injured their lungs rather severely by indulging in so-called 'Yogi' breathing without a teacher to supervise these dangerous practises. Our advice is that you leave all such things severely alone, or else write to us first, so that we can tell you what to do and what not. It is the same with the exercise we commenced this lecture with. We know of more than one Order that gives it to its students; but they all fail to advise the passing by of the centre part of the lower body where the danger lies!! Once you have mastered the technique of this and it is quite simple, really exercise, you can then concentrate on any part of the body (except the same centre zone) where there may be a feeling of slight pain at times, or of temporary discomfort. You will always note that such a place begins to throb, caused by the blood rushing towards and through it at your mental command (by just concentrating your thoughts upon it) and this has a clearing-up and healing effect. But it is useless in cases of toothache, earache or any other severe pain. In such cases you should see a doctor or dentist, as the case may be. A great deal of harm can be done by those good souls who believe that they can cure themselves by 'willpower'. This may be possible up to a point, but we never advise such foolish things to our students. 

#17

In this lecture we shall discuss another Chakram and this time we take the throat centre. When this Chakram is fully vivified it bestows the faculty of clairaudience; it is in close magnetic relationship with the so-called 'Muladhara' Chakram at the base of the spine, and it is not unusual to find that disturbances of the creative organs and functions produce corresponding disorders of the throat, which is the higher creative centre. It is the Fifth Sacred Centre, and those who are beginning to succeed in awakening it may hear sounds of music, voices that may make all sorts of suggestions, and, at times, unpleasant sounds. The prayer for protection should always be remembered before meditating on any Chakram, as well as the lapse of time between meditations on each separate centre, and a prayer of thanks for the protection received should follow the meditations without fail. Ten minutes, not more than twice per week, should be the time for each meditation on this centre. When the powers of hearing begin to manifest themselves, the sounds thus received come from one of the astral planes. For this reason it will be quite evident that the student should be completely at Peace in every sense of the word when he tries this experiment. Unrest would attune the student with the lower astral planes, below the Earth Plane. This would, or could, be dangerous. The student should retain all his reasoning and critical faculties at all times during these meditations, and when any message is received he should weigh it up with the most extreme and minute care, in case that message has been sent by one of the lower entities. Gullibility in these matters might lead to most unpleasant things. So you are warned!! If in doubt at any time - write to us about these things.
The laryngeal centre has sixteen partitions or divisions. There is a good deal of blue in it, but its general effect is silvery and gleaming, with a kind of suggestion as of moonlight upon rippling water. Blue and green, however, predominate alternately in its sections.
And we must here give an additional warning: when a person has succeeded in awakening fully all the astral senses, it does not always follow that he will be able to bring through into his physical consciousness any awareness of their action. Very often it is only the Higher Mind alone, and not the 'reasoning' brain, which is fully aware of the powers added to the higher Ego in its Higher Mind Principle. We know quite a number of highly developed mystics and occultists who have never experienced any outer realisation of such phenomena; yet in their acts, sayings and writings they show a very high knowledge of things Divine, which leaves the average man, and the average occultist
too, gaping with astonishment. And of such are also many great artists of various kinds. They may not have practised any meditations or exercises in this life, but in more than one previous incarnation they have learnt to do these things, and you know that we return with all our attributes each time we come to Earth again. But, as we remarked, even if one does practise these things now, the results may remain hidden so far as the 'phenomena' are concerned. Please remember this. 
The only way in which the earthly body can be brought to share all the advantages derived from the rousing of the sacred centres, however, is by constantly repeating the meditations in the manner advised by us.
In India there are recognised seven Schools of Yoga (pronounced 'Yog') They are:
1. Raja Yoga; 2. Karma Yoga; 3. Jnana Yoga; 4. Hatha Yoga; 5. Laya Yoga; 6. Bhakti Yoga; 7. Mantra Yoga.
Our advice is to leave all of them severely alone, unless we give further instructions later on, either privately or in these lectures. The above named systems all recognise the existence and importance of the Chakras, and each has its own method of developing them.
It will be clear to you by now why we advised you in Lecture 2 of Grade 2 when we introduced the subject of the Chakras, to imagine a pin-point of light within the heart centre. There is present in each of the sacred centres such a light; the size, intensity and brilliancy of it varies with each person, naturally; but that light is present in every sacred centre of each separate human being, while in the centres of the bodies of animals it is but a faint and dim glimmer only. 


#18

Starting from lecture 21

