 Examination Papers for the end of Grade 1. QUESTIONS and ANSWERS 

1.What is the Principle that sets in Motion the whole of the Universe from the Atom upwards? 
Answer. Divine Will. 
2.What is the constitution of the Atom for so far as discussed in this 
Grade? 
Answer. A nucleus around which whirl the electrons etc., charging the nucleus of each different type of atom according to its number of electrons. 
3.How many different kinds of atoms and/or elements are known to Science? 
Answer. 118 are known at present, although none of the so- called trans-uranic elements of atomic number greater than 92 occurs naturally. 
4.What are the seven Principles of living Man? 
Answer. Sight, hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling (making up the senses of the body or lower mind), Higher Mind and Soul. 
5. What are the polarities of (a) Soul. (b) Higher Mind? 
Answer. (a) Positive, (b) Negative. 
6.What is the purpose of the incarnation of the Higher Mind? Answer. To gather experience of the material, and to learn to overcome it and attune with the Soul. 
7.What is the Path a Higher Mind must tread when it has not evolved sufficiently and learnt all its lessons through the material? 
Answer. The Path to the Moon. 
8.Which is the Realm to which the Higher Mind proceeds when it has overcome the Sin of Ignorance?  
Answer. The Fourth Realm above or within. 
9.What are the attributes the Higher Mind needs most in order to become worthy of entering the Fourth Realm? 
Answer. Wisdom, Purity and Goodness. 
10. What is the Fourth Realm like? 
Answer. Like that region which Jesus revealed unto Peter. 
11.Can Matter or Spirit manifest independently? 
Answer. No. 
12.Is Matter 'dead' at any time? 
Answer. No. It is either active or latent but never dead. 
13.Are you of the opinion that Matter can be destroyed? Answer. No. 
14.What is the correct term for that which Science calls the Law of Gravity? 
Answer. The Law of Attraction and Repulsion. 
15.What happens at so-called 'death' of the human body? 
Answer. The Higher Mind separates from the human body or 
lower Mind. 
16.What are the three Principles that leave the Earth-plane when a person dies? (remaining in each other's company). 
Answer. The Higher Mind, Vital Spark and Astral Body. 
17.What do you understand by consciousness? 
Answer. Realisation of the Ego or Self. 
18.What is the most important Principle discussed in the First Grade 
work of The Order? 
(No answer is supplied to this question; each student should give his own opinion.) 
19.What causes 'cold' sensations when in meditation? 
Answer. Moon Influences, or impressions from elementals or elementaries. 
20.What causes 'warm' sensations when in meditation? 
Answer. Sun influences, or impressions from the Beings in the Higher Realms. 
21. How many regions or planes are (a), above or beyond the Earth- 
plane; (b), how many are below; and (c), where is the Earth placed within these Realms? 
Answer. (a) 6; (b) 6; (c) at the Centre. Thus there are seven 
higher Realms of which the Earth is the lowest, and seven lower realms of which the Earth is the highest. 
22.What progress have you made with the exercises on Peace, Power, Secrecy, Seeing and hearing? 
Answer. (Students' own words here) 
23.Are Light, Fire, Gas and Liquids to be considered as Matter? Answer. Yes. 
24.What is the most powerful form of molecule, the largest and the 
hardest? 
Answer. The Diamond. 
25.What is (a), the lightest element, and (b) The heaviest? Answer. (a), hydrogen. (b), Uranium. 
26.What is Matter in its polarity? Answer. A negative condition. 
27.What is Spirit in its polarity? 
Answer. A positive Force. 
28. Whence does the Sun derive its Light? 
Answer. From the Hidden Sun. 
29. Whence does the Moon derive its Light? 
Answer. From the visible Sun. 
30. Electrons are charged with electricity. Any material substance consists of a huge mass of electrons within the atoms. Is that substance therefore completely electrical with positive electricity? State reason. 
Answer. No; for there are positive and negative charges in an atom; one neutralising the other, with few exceptions. 
31.What are the 'nerve-centres' of the Solar System? Answer. The Planets. 
32.What prevents electrons and planets from colliding with each other? Answer. Their surrounding magnetic fields. 
33.What is the shape of the atom, and what is the shape of the Solar 
System? 
Answer. Both are egg-shaped. 
34.Can elements be transmuted from one to the other? Answer. Yes. 
35. Is Matter solid? 
Answer. No. 
36. Which of the two are subject to Vibration: Matter or Spirit? 
Answer. Both. 
37. What is electricity, so far as we have told you in Grade 1? Answer. The Life-Blood of the Universe. 
38. What is the TRUE Light? 
Answer. It is the male Essence, Wisdom or Spirit. 
39. What is Chaos? 
Answer. The female Principle, or matter. 
40.How did everything visible and invisible spring into existence? Answer. In consequence of the Intelligent Will of the Deity. 
41.Where did our Hidden Teachings originate? 
Answer. In Atlantis. 
42.Can man 'create'? And how? 
Answer. Yes; by an act of Will, as when he creates thought-forms by means of his imagination, or as a mother can determine the image of the child to be born. (And in many other ways.) 
43.Is the Soul imprisoned within the body? 
Answer. No; it never incarnates but acts as a guide or guardian. 
44.How can we direct the 'life-essence' of the Universe? 
Answer. By will and control, but only if we have ourselves under 
control first. 
45.Are molecules in a chaotic state of agitation when the temperature of a substance is raised? 
Answer. No; all movement in nature is subject to fixed laws. 
46.What are the three movements of molecules in heated substances? Answer. Molecular, rotational and vibrational. 
47.Where else can we note similar movements? 
Answer. In the sacred centres of the human body, and to a smaller extent in those of animals. 
48.On what Principle were nearly all the ancient religions based? Answer. On the indestructibility of Matter and Force, plus the emanation of the whole from an ethereal, spiritual Fire, the Central, Hidden Sun, which is God or Spirit. 
49.What is the difference between a Kosmos and a Universe? Answer. A Kosmos, or Solar System, is but a small atom within a Universe. 
50.What causes affinities to rush together? 
Answer. Spiritual attraction or magnetism. 
51.What is the real difference between the Laws of the Material and the Spiritual Principles? 
Answer. The material laws are but reflections of the spiritual Forces existing on the higher octaves of the Celestial Universal 
vibrations. 
52. Do animals have Souls? 
Answer. No. 
53.Do animals have Higher Minds? 
Answer. Not as a rule, but some give indications of it when they are highly evolved as far as animal instinct and intellect are concerned. 
54.When does an animal acquire a Higher Mind? 
Answer. When the animal form has the appearance of a human being. 
55.When does an animal acquire a Soul? 
Answer. As soon as it has received a Higher Mind within its animal human body; for Higher Mind and Soul are the two manifestations of the same Divine Principle, though the Soul is Positive and without, and the Higher Mind negative and within the body. Both are that 'ONE thing'. 
56.What is the Divine Principle that is in all material and spiritual manifestations from atom to Angel, giving them LIFE? Answer. The Divine Spark. 
57. What is the Divine Spark? 
Answer. The Life-Principle latent in the purely organic substance, active in living bodies. 
58.What is the Lower Mind? 
Answer. The Body, bodily consciousness, and instinct. 
59.What is Intelligence? 
Answer. A natural development of the three foregoing principles. 
60. Is intelligence a divine attribute? 
Answer. No; it is a material one, so far as the lower mind etc., are concerned. 
61. What is extension of consciousness? 
Answer. Communion of the Higher Mind with the Soul, thus 
obtaining awareness of other places in the Universe, different from the one we are in at that time. 
62.What is imagination? 
Answer. Seeing beyond our present surroundings and building thought forms with the aid of the Mind. 
63.How can we best attain the condition of Peace? 
Answer. By relaxation of all our faculties. 
64. 
Does Spirit ever dwell in Matter? 
Answer. No; Matter clings to Spirit. 
65.What is Spirit? 
Answer. Life in the true Light. 
66.What is the greatest material sin? 
Answer. Ignorance. 
67.What is Force created by? 
Answer. By Spirit. 
68. 
What created Matter? 
Answer. Force. 
69.Has matter eternal life, the same as spirit? 
Answer. Yes. But it is subject to cycles of activity and inactivity. 
70.What is the nature of that Matter which is different from matter as we know it on Earth, and which is co-eternal with Spirit? Answer. It is sublimated matter on a higher plane. 
71.Can the Higher Minds of the 'departed' manifest on the Earthly Plane? 
Answer. Only in the case of highly evolved beings who have learnt the secrets of attunement and projection. 
72.How can we contact the departed? (provided that they themselves are in a conscious state of being). 
Answer. By projecting our consciousness to the plane where they dwell. 
73. What are the polarities of the Sun and Moon? 
Answer. The Sun is positive; the Moon is negative. 
74.What does lunar magnetism do? 
Answer. It generates life, preserves it, and destroys it. 

75.What is the most sacred single number? 
Answer. The number 7. 
76.What is the double glyph for the 'sevenfold' man? 
Answer. The Triangle with the point at the apex and the square underneath it. 
77.What do these two symbols further represent? 
Answer. The square represents the four material planes; the triangle the three Divine. 
78.In which Lecture can you find the principles of the Sushumna Ray? Answer. Lectures 31 and 33 of Grade 1. 
79. Is the Sun a planet? 
Answer. No; it is a star. 
80.How many planets (apart from the Earth, which is a Globe, and the moon, which is a satellite) are recognised by Occult Science? Answer. Seven. 
81.What are the names of those planets? 
Answer. Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury and Venus are the four exoteric planets; the other three are not named, but they are not 
Uranus, Neptune, Pluto or Mars. 
82.What is the Divine Light? 
Answer. A direct emanation of the Universal Mind, emanating from the Logos; the original First Matter, Divine and Intelligent. 
83.What is the inner Principle of the Divine Light? 
Answer. It is the Life Principle in all things and beings, and the Consciousness of God. 
84. Why is the Divine Light only reflected from the Sun, and why does 
it not illuminate the material worlds directly? 
Answer. (This has not been explained in our Lectures, but we should like to have your personal conclusions on the subject). Our answer: Because the gross and dense material worlds would be destroyed and burnt up by its direct Rays. 
85.What are the three meanings of the word Soma as far as we have dealt with it in Grade 1? 
Answer. (1) The Moon; (2) The plant; (3) The sacred juice of the plant. 
86. What is the difference between Budha and Buddha? 
Answer. Budha means Wisdom; Buddha is the greet Sage known as Gautama Buddha. 
87.What is the purpose of rolling up the body in a circle? Answer. To regulate the circulation of the vital magnetic fluid in such a manner that it warms and strengthens the body. 
88.How does Spirit move? 
Answer. It circles continually like a wheel. 
89.Who are the two classes of Pitris, and how many are there? Answer. The higher ones are the Solar Lords or 'Rays'; the lower ones are the lunar 'Ancestors'. There are seven of each of these. 
90.On which symbols did Pythagoras build his 'Music of the Spheres'? 
Answer. On the Triangle and the Cross. 
91. Who gave Man his Earthly body? Answer. The 'Spirits' of the Earth. 

92.Who were the 'Shadows of the Lord'? 
Answer. The First Race of Man; they having no substance. 
93.Who placed the 'Spark of Life' in these Shadows? 
Answer. The Solar Spirits. 
94.Who were the parents of the First Race? 
Answer. The Sun and Moon Forces. (See Lecture Number 36. Grade 1.) 
95.What is the Tiaou? 
Answer. One of the Realms of the Cause of earthly life, and the place where man dwells between his incarnations. 
96.What metal represents the Moon? 
Answer. Silver. 
97. How do you differentiate between Forces and conditions? 
Answer. Force is Positive polarity; Condition negative. 
98. 
In which Lecture do you find an explanation of what happens when a person 'dies'? 
Answer. Grade 1. Numbers 39 and 50. 
99. What is the correct interpretation of Castor and Pollux? 
Answer. They represent the lower and higher minds respectively. 100. In which Lecture do you find a complete description of the nature 
of the Sun-Force? 
Answer. Grade 1. Number 43. 
101. What is the principal function of Aether? 
Answer. It connects all things in the Kosmos and is the medium for heat, light and motion. 
102. How is the Kosmos worked and guided? 
Answer. From within outwards. 
103. Who are the Guides and workers of the Kosmic Realms? 
Answer. The great Hierarchies of Spiritual Entities and their sub divisions, down to the elemental forces. 
104. What is the Root of everything in the manifested and unmanifested 
Universe? 
Answer. Fire; and the Spirit - beyond manifested Nature is the Fiery breath in its absolute Unity. In the manifested Universe it is the Central Spiritual Sun, the electric fire of all Life. 
105. What numerals represent 'Self' and 'Mind'? And what is the most 
perfect number? 
Answer. The numerals 1 and 0; for Fire (the root of self) in its ultimate constitution is 1; the Root of which is 0 in our conception, the All in Nature and its Mind. Hence 10 is the sacred Number and IO the Sacred Word for Deity. 
106. Whence comes creative Light? 
Answer. From the Central Sun. 
107. Who are the Seven Sons? 
Answer. The Seven Planes of Being; also the Seven Angelic Planes, whose Hosts collectively are the Gods thereof. 
108. In which Lecture is the difference between the Semitic and Aryan 
Cosmogony explained? 
Answer. Grade 1. Number 44. 
109. Which is the 'First-Begotten' and the 'First Emanation' of the 
Supreme, and what does it represent? 
Answer. Light; and Light is Life - and both are electricity, which is the Life-principle of the Universe. 
110. Where are you told what Aether is? 
Answer. At the end of Lecture 45. Grade 1. 
111. Which Lecture deals with the glands? Answer. Grade 1. Number 46. 
112. In which Lecture are the 7 plexuses and principles explained? 
Answer. Grade 1. Number 47. 
113. Where are Vibration, Motion and Rhythm first introduced in the 
Lectures? 
Answer. Grade 1. Numbers 48 and 49. 
114. How can we attain Divine Consciousness? 
Answer. By means of the attunement of the Higher Mind with the Soul. 
