SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 7. 

Dear Disciple, 
The so-called diffuse nebulae are similar to the dark nebulae in that they have no particular shape at all, but appear much like clouds of vapour in space. They differ from the dark nebulae in the important respect that they are luminous and can be studied extensively. They are usually associated with stars and it has been conclusively shown that the material of which the nebulae is composed is excited to luminescence by those stars. Years ago Hubble showed that there is a direct correlation between the brightness of the associated stars and the extent to which the diffuse nebulae are luminous, i.e., the brighter the star the more extensive is the luminous nebula. 
Furthermore, the characteristics of the spectrum of a luminous diffuse nebula are directly correlated with the spectrum class of the associated star. If the star is B-type or hotter, the spectrum of the nebula shows brighter lines; if the star is cooler than B-type the spectrum is of the dark line type, suggesting that the nebula is shining principally by reflected star light. In the few cases where diffuse nebulae are associated with variable stars, the characteristics of the nebulae change with the changes in the light from the associated stars. 
The density of the diffuse nebulae must be exceedingly low, observes Science. Dynamical studies of the huge diffuse nebula in Orion indicate a density of less than one one-billionth of that of air. It is apparently a more perfect vacuum than is produced in a laboratory, yet its immense size indicates that its total mass may be comparable with that of the average star. This is of course perfectly true, for these nebulae are globes (not stars) in the making. All the materials necessary for the production of a globe or planet are already present, no matter how tenuous the gas cloud which forms a nebula of this kind. The 'associated stars' are the 'elder brothers' of the new globe which is in the course of production as a rule, just as our Sun is the 'elder brother' of the planets in our Solar System......having been 'born' first. 
When we come to the 'planetary' nebulae (which received their name from the fact that they have much the same appearance as a small planet) we have a much more condensed globe, nearer to completion in every way. "Detailed studies indicate that these objects are probably ellipsoidal (mark the form of shape, please) masses of gas", says Science!! Here is a confirmation of our teachings in which we told you, in Grade 1, that planets, atoms and universes are 'egg- shaped'. 
Studies with the spectroscope have indicated that the planetary nebulae are in rotation about the minor axis and that there is also a complicated internal motion in many objects. Do you remember what we have told you about the internal motion within the sacred centres of man's bodily vehicle? The apparent disk is brighter at the edges than at the centre (the aura or magnetic luminous field surrounding each substance, from electron to atom, and from atom to Sun, Kosmos and Universe) and hence some of them appear as rings of light (!) and are known as annular nebulae. Do you note how beautifully everything is falling into place? 
"In most cases", says Science, "the planetary nebulae have a star at the centre, and this star is of the hot, blue spectral class." This 'star' is, of course, the nucleus around which the gasses turn, just as the electrons turn around the nucleus of an atom; but in the case of the nebulae these 'gasses' are drawn in, in a gradual manner, swelling the nucleus all the time, a process which takes many, many millions of mortal centuries, until at last the globe is complete and follows its orbit in the shape of a great mass of molten, glowing matter, which will condense as it cools and become eventually, a globe such as the one we live on for the present. 
"There can be little doubt", says Science, "that the radiation from the nebulous material is directly associated with the central star." Of course it is, for it is all part of the same body to be. Several attempts have been made by Science to introduce the planetary nebulae into the evolutionary sequence for the stars, but without success. How could Science succeed here when it does not know the Sacred Laws, or when it rejects these Laws without proper investigation? 
The spectra of the planetary nebulae and those of bright diffuse nebulae (also called emission nebulae) which are associated with stars of type B, or hotter, are characterised by bright lines of gaseous radiation. These bright lines are mainly produced by ionized hydrogen (H-II) which emits both visible and radio radiations, and is the most abundant element present in these nebulae. However, for many years a number of these lines could not be accounted for and were thought to be produced by an unknown element which was called ‘nebulium', but eventually, as astronomical research techniques improved, it was found that they were due to the presence of doubly ionized oxygen (also known as O III) and nitrogen. (Another Scientific theory with a pretty name gone West! Or as one scientist put it at the time: "Nebulium has vanished into thin air"!!) 
The true bright nebulae are made up of tenuous gas mixed with 'grains' of Cosmic dust (otherwise already formed atoms of the heavier kind) attracted to the huge mass of incandescent material, which has been excited to self-luminosity by the ionizing effect of the very hot stars embedded in the nebulosity. In the Nebula in Orion oxygen, neon, nitrogen, sulphur, argon, chlorine, and small quantities of other elements have been discovered apart from the main constituent, hydrogen, already mentioned. 
All the foregoing appertains to the nebulae within our Galactic System. What were formerly thought to be extra-galactic nebulae are now known to be none other than vast groups of stars; star clusters of all sizes; universes quite separate from our own. The largest of these are called 'Spiral' Galaxies, having a symmetrical structure, with two spiral arms emerging from a bright central nucleus about which they rotate. There are countless millions of these universes within the reach of modern telescopes. 
Examinations of variable stars early in this century eventually led to the discovery of the period-luminosity law applicable to a certain class of stars called Cepheids. It was again Hubble who found that there was a definite link between the period and absolute magnitude, so that the luminosity of a Cepheid could be found merely by observing the way in which it fluctuates. Once the luminosity is known, the distance of the star can be calculated without difficulty. By examining the Cepheids contained in the Andromeda Spiral (which was found to be 2,200,000 light years distant), he established the fact that the various 'Spiral Nebulae' as they were then called, were external star systems and not contained in the Milky Way as previously thought. By various statistical methods, largely developed by Hubble, the distance of a number of other extra-galactic objects were obtained; distances of the order of magnitude of 1,000,000,000 light years were calculated; which seems to have been the limiting distance at which these objects could be distinguished with the 100-inch telescope he used. The 200- inch Mount Palomar telescope, radio telescopes, X-ray techniques within satellites and the Hubble Space telescope have expanded these distances enormously, dwarfing anything previously considered by Science. They have also brought into view certain objects the nature of which Science has not yet determined. 
In 1963 a new class of objects was discovered. They were called Quasars (QSO's or quasi-stellar objects). These enigmatic objects were first identified by radio but are now recognised by their spectrum; they appear to emit both light and radio waves. They are seen as a star-like point of light, and some scientists claim that a powerful Quasar emits more energy than 100 Galaxies! Almost fifty years after their discovery little is still understood about them apart from the fact that they are the most luminous and distant objects known. It is believed that some are up to 12,000,000,000 light years distant; but such limitations are no doubt due to man's inability to penetrate deeper into space. So far, about 200,000 have been optically identified, mostly from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey which began in 2002. Some astronomers have conjectured that quasars may be produced by super massive ‘black holes' whilst others speculate that they may be 'very young galaxies in the process of formation.' Do you note how this links up with our discussions on the Days and Nights of Brahma? We will refer to quasars and the mysterious 'black holes' again in later Studies. 
The extra-galactic systems are not all the same shape. Some are: (1). Spirals (with sub-divisions of normal spirals and barred 
spirals) 
(2). Elliptical, and 
(3). Irregular. 
A more detailed sub-division of each main type is too complex to be considered in these Lectures. Any Student who wishes to delve into this fascinating subject is advised to obtain some good modern work on astronomy. Although there is still no consensus among Scientists as to the percentage distribution of the extra-galactic systems so far classified, Science estimates that about 75% belong to the first type, 20% to the second, and 5% to the third. 
Direct optical, spectrographic and radio studies of some of the brighter spirals indicate that they contain certain objects which are in rotation about their minor axis: these are some of the Solar Systems within these Galaxies; for each Spiral thus observed is a Galactic System or Universe on its own. The major rotation around the Central Sun of each can only be inferred, not observed, as it is of such magnitude that - at those great distances - it seems to have no such rotation, though modern photographs clearly indicate this circular movement: they look like magnificent Catherine Wheels. The actual rotation of even our own Universe or Galactic System cannot be seen or measured for the same reason. Yet the Atlantean Sages could do so. Progress? (Scientists have recently suggested that our own Galaxy rotates once every 500 million years. We place little reliance upon this figure; the period must be vastly in excess of this). 
Modern astronomers have now revealed that our own Galaxy is accompanied by countless millions of others: that in fact there are galaxies of galaxies, and that our own galactic system belongs to one of these 'clusters' or 'groups' of galaxies. The number so far discovered is so huge that it has proved hopeless to even contemplate cataloguing them all. 
We have, as you will remember, already told you that such is the case, and that there is absolutely no end to the number of these universes, or groups of universes, and that they are combined in Super- Universes, turning around Central Suns of unimaginable magnitudes. 
Yet overwhelming as such ideas may be these are but the material Illusionary veils of matter in excelsis, and these are as nothing when compared with the Majestic Realms of the Spirit, Realms which are still more unimaginably greater and sublime!! 
You will now realise that our previous studies of the atom are beginning to bear fruit, for those same studies will help you to form a mind-picture of the conditions existing in these nebulae and spirals, and you will have an additional idea of how the axiom 'As above, so below' works out inevitably in every instance. 
Each Galactic System is therefore no more than a complicated Super Atom, as it were, in which everything whirls around its nucleus; each nucleus being a Hidden Deity, whether in Atom or Galactic System, each flooding their system with Life and Light. 
And do not lose sight of the fact that our Milky Way is but a small fraction of the outer ring of our own Universe, and that the hundreds of millions of extra-galactic Systems, etc., discovered by Science so far are but a very minute part of the incalculable total that surround our Universe from all sides. 
May the Life and Light blaze within and around you for all Eternity and may it condense into that great Love, which is Attunement, or at-one-ment with the Sublime Deity in every sense. 
Your Hidden Master. 
