SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 2. 

Dear Disciple, 
 
We have spoken in our previous Lectures about the 'Races' of Man, and we must now give you a few details about these races, they were, are, and may become in the future. We deem it best to commence with a very condensed table of the Races before we enter into any details, and we therefore tabulate them as follows: 
The First Root Race. 
This was the so-called Adamic or Astral Race of Man. They were huge and indefinite of form. This Race was spiritual within and ethereal without. There is nothing known about any 'Sub-Races' in this case. It had only one sense: that of hearing. 
The Second Root Race. 
This was called the Hyperborean. 
It had the same appearance as the First Root Race, but it was psycho-spiritual mentally, and ethero-physical bodily. It had two senses: hearing and feeling, or touch. Both the First and the Second Root Race were of a low state of outward-going consciousness, exercised through the sense of hearing in the case of the First and of hearing and feeling in the case of the Second Root Race. 
It is not possible to say in which continent the First Root Race lived, but is called in Occult terminology the 'Sacred Imperishable Land'. The Second Root Race lived in the Hyperborean continent, after which it is named, part of which was situated in what is now known as Northern Asia. During the times in which this Race existed on Earth called the Satya Yuga, or age of Truth - the so-called 'Manu with bones', made its primeval appearance under the title of the 'Sweat-born'. Man's body became gradually more solid physically until it merged into the Third Root Race. 
The Third Root Race. This was the Lemurian. 
This Root Race lived in the vanished Lemurian continent which stretched from the Indian Ocean to Australia, of which New Zealand is a remnant. It was a Race still bereft of intellect in its beginning, Was astro-physical in its body, and lived an inner life in which the psycho-spiritual element was interfered with in no 
way by the hardly nascent physiological senses. Its two front eyes looked before them without seeing either past or future; but the third eye embraced Eternity. 
This was the so-called 'Sweat-born' or 'Egg-born'. Gigantic in size, Androgynes or Hermaphrodites during the earlier parts of this Race, but later on it differentiated into distinctly male or female forms. There is no definite information about their division into Seven sub-Races, but some degraded remnants of the Third Root Race still exist in the forms of the aborigines of Australia, the Andaman Islanders, some of the Hill Tribes in India, the Tierra-del-Fuegans, the Bushmen and Hottentots of Africa, and some other savage tribes. Root Race Three, Four and Five overlapped in time, though one gave birth to the next. 
The Fourth Root Race. 
These were the Atlanteans. 
The Tartars, Chinese and Mongolians are descendants of the Fourth Root Race. 
The Seven Sub-Races of the Fourth Root Race, of which the Toltecs were the most important, were: The Rmoahal, the Tlavatli, the Toltec, the Turanian, the Semitic, the Akhadian and the Mongolian sub-races. 
The Fifth Root Race. These are the Aryans. 
Its progenitors were taken from the fifth Atlantean sub-race, the Semitic. (So much for the 'Pure' Aryan stock of Hitler & Co!) The type being established, it was led by the Manu Vaivasvata, some 850,000 years ago to the plains of Northern India, warring against the indigenous people, the Titans, Daityas and the Rakshasas, as recorded in the Hindu sacred books. 
Five of the Seven Sub-Races of the Fifth Root Race have already appeared on Earth and run their course; viz., 
1. The Indo-Aryan 
2. The Aryo-Semitic 
3. The Iranian 
4. The Keltic 
5. The Teutonic or European 
The sixth Sub-race, called by some occultists, the 'american- australian', euro-american, etc., is in the process of being formed in America, Europe and Australia. We shall develop this theme in due course, as it is very important for us to know at least a little 
about it. 
In the meantime we will give you a further exercise in connection with meditation and the gradual development of your inner centres and Principles. It is as follows: when you have uttered your usual prayer and relaxed your Higher and lower Minds as instructed in the First Grade, you should imagine in the inmost centre of your being (it would be good and safe if you imagined this centre as being situated within your heart) a tiny pinpoint of consciousness filled with Light. You may call this the Christ-consciousness if you wish, but its name does not matter. Concentrate on this pinpoint until you not only sense, but see it with your eyes closed and their gaze turned inwards as it were. 
When you have succeeded in doing this, and after your colour exercises it should not be too difficult, you should imagine this point to be the centre too of anything you wish to be enlightened upon; on any problem you have. When that is done you must try to make the pinpoint grow in size, so that it becomes at first a tiny light or flame of white or gold, and later on grows to a definite Beacon of Light. You have this Light within you already; you are not creating, imaging or imagining it; for it is the inner Spark which is always in direct contact with your own Soul, Higher Self, or Ego. You should try to focus all your faculties of the Higher Mind upon this pinpoint, or on the flame when later on you succeed in seeing it, and it will act as a carrier which will take your inner consciousness outward to the Higher Realms, or inward to the same; for there are two ways of approach to them in this manner. 
Do not overdo this exercise, but go easy with it. Fifteen minutes at a time, two or three times a week is ample at first. Do not strain any of your faculties, but remain relaxed in every way. If you fall asleep it does not matter, but try to keep awake if you can. Do not forget your prayer for guidance and protection!! 
Before you commence arrange with yourself upon what you are going to meditate. Remember too that within the heart, the aorta, is 
placed a sacred centre which can be developed in everyone and set ablaze with splendour. The rays of that flame shoot outwards and in front of your body in a straight beam; but the real beacon remains inside. Here is one explanation of the two ways of approach we mentioned just now. Such a centre is called a chakram, and there are seven such chakras within the human body. The one we are now concerned with is the cardiac chakram or the Anahita; it is the fourth, or central one, and this is one of the reasons why we commence with it; the second reason is that it is the safest to commence with. By this we do not mean that the others are dangerous! 
This exercise is optional, of course, the same as any others we give you. We shall develop the teachings of the chakras from time to time, but in the meanwhile we must return to our studies of vibration and motion which we left off towards the end of the First Grade, and to a further study of the Sun. 
When we talk of 'Vibrations' we need not necessarily think of such rapid vibrations as those which are present in the phenomena of Light, Sound, etc. There are, in Esoteric Philosophy, other kinds of vibrations in the form of immense periods in time, such as those known as the Days and Nights of Brahma. There is one sentence in an ancient sacred book in which mention is made of: "The last Vibration of the Seventh Eternity (which) thrills through Infinitude." 
The seemingly paradoxical use of the term 'Seventh Eternity', thus dividing the indivisible, actually divides Boundless Duration into unconditionally eternal and Universal Time and conditioned Time. One being the abstraction or noumenon of infinite Time, the other its phenomenon appearing periodically as the effect of Universal Intelligence, limited by what is called Manvantaric Duration. This has to do with the great Cycles of Sleep and Activity which will be discussed in this Grade. Thus the great vibrations sweep along, touching with their swift wings the whole Universe and the Germ that dwelleth in Darkness, the Darkness that Breathes - or moves - over the slumber- ing Waters of Life. 
On the one hand we have absolute Abstract Space, representing bare subjectivity, the one thing which no human mind can either exclude from any conception, or conceive of by itself. On the other hand we have absolute Abstract Motion, representing Unconditioned Consciousness. This is an 'Eastern' Doctrine now, and has been for hundreds of thousands of years, but the original teaching came from the great Sages of Atlantis. 
Today, even our Western thinkers have shown that consciousness is inconceivable to us apart from change (not necessarily from one place to another place), and motion (which may be mere 'growing', such as in plants) best symbolises change, its essential characteristic. This latter aspect of the One Reality is also symbolised by the term: "The Great Breath', a symbol sufficiently graphic to need no further elucidation. 
- 
But we might add that the 'Breath of the One Existence', the One Life, is only used in application to the spiritual aspect of Cosmogony by Archaic Esotericism; in other cases it is replaced by its equivalent on the material plane Motion. The One Eternal Element, or element- containing vehicle, is space, dimensionless in every sense; coexistent with which are Endless Duration, primordial (and therefore indestructible) Matter, and Motion-Absolute Perpetual Motion, which is the 'Breath' of the One Element. This Breath can never cease, not even during the Eternities of Rest or Sleep of the Universe. 
There is much of great importance in this Lecture, and we trust that you will study it deeply. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master 
