SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 5. 

Dear Disciple, 
It has been stated correctly that: "Everything has come out of Primordial Substance (or the one infinite and unknown essence underlying manifestation on Earth) in obedience to the Law of Motion inherent in it, and after a certain existence (it) passes away". No thing ever came out of nothing. If a Vedantic Brahman of the Advaita Sect were asked whether he believed in the existence of God, he would probably answer, as Jacolliot was answered - I am myself 'God'; while a Buddhist (especially a Sinhalese), would simply laugh, and say in reply: "There is no God; no creation". Yet the root philosophy of both Advaita and Buddhist scholars is identical, and both have the same respect for animal life, for both believe that every creature on Earth however small or humble, "is an immortal portion of the immortal Matter" Matter having with them quite another significance from that which it has with every Christian or Materialist. 
— 
The answer of the Brahman would have suggested itself to every ancient philosopher, Kabalist and Gnostic of the early days. It contains the very spirit of the Delphic and Kabalistic commandments, for Esoteric Philosophy solved, ages ago, the problem of what man was, is, and will be; his origin, Life-cycle interminable in its duration of successive incarnations or rebirths and his final absorption into the Source from which he started. Yet both Brahman and Buddhist, as well as some of the ancient philosophers are wrong to a certain extent when they deny the existence of a God, a Supreme Ruler, or Supreme Deity. When the Brahman claims to be God himself he is right insofar as his Soul and Higher Mind are One Flame from the Great Fire; but the answer seemingly ignores the Root of his being — which is the Supreme Being, the One Life. The Buddhist answer is completely wrong in its denial of both God and Creation, as well as Creators; the reason being that although Buddha himself knew the truth by means of his great Illuminations, his followers of the succeeding centuries after his death had not the same illumination, and therefore not the same truth. The Gnostic and Ancient Philosophers could not give the whole answer, for they belonged to the great Mystery Schools and were under oath not to reveal the inner Truths, the majority of mankind not being ready for it then any more than it is now. 
The idea of a God in the shape of a Planetary Logos; a Hidden Logos in the shape of that sacred Principle from which all the material Kosmos has sprung; and the idea of a Supreme Deity, the Central Hidden Fire from which the Hidden Logos has its origin, and from which spring the Planetary Logoi, is one of these great Arcana which 
cannot be revealed and understood by the majority. In the last sentence you have yet another aspect of the Trinity. This will be the subject of later studies, but you should make a note of it now and think about it from time to time. It is the intention of your Hidden Masters to give you in this Second Grade a number of the Septenary and other Principles in their regular order, so that you may obtain a preliminary view of the Grand Spectacle of Creation and the Creators, a marvellous panorama which will be unfolded gradually to your inner perceptions. 
In the meanwhile we are still studying the terms 'motion' and 'vibration', both of which are closely linked up with Creation, as you will understand. One Scientist stated once that the pressure of strong Sunlight on a square mile is about 34 lbs. This, it was maintained, is "the energy of the myriad ether waves". But Science only errs in believing that, because it has detected in vibratory waves the proximate cause of such phenomena, that it therefore has revealed all that lies beyond the threshold of ordinary sense. Occult Science states that those etheric tremors are not set up, as asserted by Science, by the vibrations of the molecules of known bodies, such as the Sun and the matter of our terrestrial objective consciousness, but that we must seek for the ultimate causes of light, heat etc., in Matter existing in supersensuous states. And these latter are as fully objective to the spiritual eye of Man, as a horse or a tree is to the ordinary mortal. Such states can be perceived by the Seer or the Adept during the hours of trance, under the Sushumna Ray — which, as you know, is the first of the Seven Mystic Rays of the Sun. 

The names of the Seven Rays of the Sun are: 
1. Sushumnā, or Inshumnā. 
2. Harikesha. 
Repulsion, 
Hed Maniter 
innur big Hest of Essence, in 
3. Vishvakarman. 
4. Vishvatryarchās. 
5. Sannaddha. 
6. Sarvāvasu. 
7. Svarāj. 

These above named seven rays are personified as Gods in the Vedas. They are the Seven creative Energies of Nature. 
All are mystical and each has its distinct application in a distinct state of consciousness for Occult purposes. The totality of the Seven Rays spread through the Solar System constitutes, so to say, the physical basis of the Ether of Science, in which light, heat, electricity, etc., the forces of orthodox Science, correlate to produce their terrestrial effects. As psychic and spiritual effects they emanate from, and have their origin in, the supra-solar basis, in the Aether of the Occultists, the 'primordial Substance' of which the elements Air, Fire, Water and Earth are but lower manifestations. 
We have spoken about the perpetual motion of the 'Breaths' in our previous Lecture. As far as it goes, all motion is in one sense perpet- ual. In masses, whose motion is stopped by mutual concussion, heat or motion of its particles is generated; and thus the motion continues so that we should assume the same amount of motion affecting the same amount of matter for ever; for: where force is made to oppose force, and produce static equilibrium, the balance of pre-existing equilibrium is affected, and fresh motion is started equivalent to that which is withdrawn into a state of abeyance. This process finds intervals such as those in the times of 'Rest' in the cycles of the Universe or the Kosmos, but it is eternal and ceaseless as the 'Breath', even when the Universe or the Kosmos rests. 
The Divine Light, that which is called 'Fohat', is the informing, ever-present moving-power and life-principle, the Vital Soul of the Suns, Moons and Planets and of our Earth, the invisible Ruler and Guide of the gross body attached to, and connected with, its Soul, which is the spiritual emanation of the respective Planetary Spirits. 
In the two opposite forces of Attraction and Repulsion, Occultism sees the two aspects of the Universal Unit called Manifesting Mind, in which it perceives through the great Seers an innumerable Host of operative Beings; Cosmic Angels and other Entities, whose Essence, in its dual nature, is the Cause of all terrestrial phenomena. That Essence is con-substantial with the universal Electric Ocean, which is LIFE; and being dual positive and negative - it is the emanations of that duality that act on Earth under the name of 'modes of motion'. The dual effects of that dual Essence cause all the phenomena called centripetal and centrifugal forces, negative and positive poles, or polarity, heat and cold, light and darkness, etc. Even the Greek and Roman Catholic Christians are wiser in believing, as they do — even if blindly connecting and tracing them all to an anthropomorphic God in Angels, Archangels, Archons, Seraphs and Morning Stars, in all those theological deliciae humani generis, in short, that rule the Cosmic Elements, than Science is, in disbelieving in them altogether, and in advocating mechanical Forces only. For it is a fact that these 'mechanical Forces' very often act with more than human intelligence and pertinency. 
Nevertheless, these invisible Beings, Intelligences, Elements and Worlds exist. The latter are inhabited as thickly as our own and are scattered throughout apparent Space in immense numbers; some are far more material than our own World, others are gradually materialising until they become 'formless' and are as 'Breaths'. The fact that our physical eye does not see them is no reason for disbelieving in them. Physicists cannot see their Ether, Atoms, modes of motion or Forces. Yet they accept them and teach them. 

Hermes Trismegistus says: "Concerning the void judgement is that it does not exist, that it never has existed, and that it never will exist, for all the various parts of the Universe are filled, as the Earth also is complete and full of bodies, differing in quality and in form, having their species and their magnitude, one larger, one smaller, one solid, one tenuous. The larger are easily perceived; the smaller are difficult to apprehend, or altogether invisible. We know only of their existence by the sensation of feeling, wherefore many persons deny such entities to be bodies, and regard them as simply spaces, but it is impossible that there should be such spaces. For if indeed there should be anything outside the Universe 
then it would be a space occupied by intelligent beings analogous to its (universe's) Divinity I speak of the genii, for I hold they dwell with us, and of the heroes who dwell above us, between the earth and the higher airs: wherein are neither clouds nor any tempest" (Anna Kingsford's translation; see note at end). 
Although Eastern Occultism does not speak of 'above', 'without', 'below', but only recognises a complicated system of 'within-ness', we often use these terms, as in the above quotation, in order that we may reach the conception of 'away' or 'beyond-ness' from the Earth- Plane. Our students should bear this in mind. 
'Space' is the real World, while our earthly world is an artificial one. Space is the One Unity throughout its infinitude: in its bottomless depths as on its illusive surface; a surface studded with countless phenomenal Universes, Systems and mirage-like Worlds. Nevertheless, 
to the Eastern Occultist, who is an objective Idealist at heart, in the real world, which is a Unity of Forces, there is "a connection of all Matter in the Plenum", as Leibnitz would say. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
NOTE: Translation of The Virgin of the World of Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus by Anna Kingsford & Edward Maitland, pub. George Redway, London, 1885. This book was re-printed in 1977 by Wizard's Bookshelf, San Diego, U.S.A., and by Forgotten Books in 2008. So far as we are aware it is still available in print and various digital formats, so Students who are interested in this important Hermetic fragment should have no difficulty in obtaining a copy. 
