SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 6. 
1 
Dear Disciple, 
In one of the most important of the ancient Sacred Books appears the following Teaching: 
"The Root of Life was in every drop of the Ocean of Immortality, and the Ocean of Radiant Light, which was Fire, and Heat and Motion. Darkness vanished and was no more; it disappeared in its own Essence, the Body of Fire and Water, of Father and Mother." 
We give you this Teaching as a special meditation exercise; please dwell on it deeply and find its hidden meaning in the light of our previous and following Teachings and then send us your interpretation of it when you next write to us. This is the only way to learn how to read and understand such enigmatic writings. 
In the 'Revue Germanique' of 31st December 1860, Humbolt wrote: "Trans-Solar space has not hitherto shown any phenomenon analogous to our Solar System. It is a peculiarity of our System, that matter should have condensed within it in nebulous rings, the nuclei of which condense into earths and moons." 
Since 1860 the Nebular Theory has sprung up, although the term 'nebula' (stella nebulosa) was applied originally by astronomers to distinguish any luminous spot which remained fixed among the stars. Before the application of the telescope to astronomy probably the only objects of this character that were observed were certain of the galactic star clusters, although in the 10th century an Arabian observer gives a reference to the great spiral in Andromeda. Following the application of the telescope, many more nebulous objects were discovered, and it was recognised that some of them could be resolved into individual stars. The term 'nebula' is applied to any nebulous object which remains approximately fixed among the stars and which cannot be resolved into separate stars. Nebulae may be divided into two major classifications: the galactic nebulae and the extra-galactic nebulae. The galactic nebulae receive their name from the fact that they are all members of our own galactic system and show the same general distribution relative to the galactic plane as is the case for stars. They may be conveniently discussed under three headings: the dark nebulae, the diffuse nebulae, and the planetary nebulae. 
The dark nebulae are, as their name implies, dark objects and can only be detected by the absorption which they produce. Until recently, they had only been found in the Milky Way, for it is in this region of the sky that the stars are the most numerous, and hence the effects of an absorbing medium would be most noticeable. With the aid of the latest instruments and techniques Science has now discovered dark nebulae in other portions of the siderial Universe, thus confirming our ever unfailing Hermetic axiom, 'As Above, so Below'. Examination of a good photograph of the Milky Way in the constellation Ophiuchus will indicate at once the dark regions. One of the most famous of these is the snake nebula (Barnard 72), an S-shaped dark nebula found in this constellation. Barnard, in an extensive study of long exposure photographs of the entire Milky Way, lists nearly 350 of such markings. They range in size from very small spots up to the huge rift that extends nearly a third of the way round the Milky Way, from Cygnus to Centaurus, and is clearly visible to the unaided eye. In a few cases the dark nebulae are associated with stars and diffuse nebulae, and the distance of these objects have been estimated as of the order of magnitude of 400 light years. 
"For very obvious reasons", says Science, "comparatively nothing is known regarding the physical character of the dark nebulae. It may be demonstrated that the total obscuration of the huge cloud in Ophiuchus could be produced by a total mass equivalent to twelve suns, provided the particles of the mass were of an optimum size.” 
But Occult Science can tell you immediately what these dark nebulae are; and it may be that you have already guessed it when you remembered our previous discussions on the Nights and Days of Brahma, or the periods of sleep and wakefulness to which every Kosmos (and every Universe in a larger sense) is subjected in Eternity. Here then is the correct answer to the problem. We will now give you the time-periods, according to the calculations and measurements of the ancient Sages of Atlantis; and we will also give you the terms under which these Cycles of Days and Nights etc., the BREATHS of God, are known in the Aryan Philosophy of India. 
Term of Cycle 
360 days of a mortal year: 
Mortal Years. 

Krita Yuga contains: . 
Treta Yuga contains: . 
Dvapara Yuga contains: 
Kali Yuga contains: 
The total of the above 4 Yugas constitute a Maha Yuga: 
71 of such Maha Yugas form the period of the reign of One MANU: ... 
The reign of 14 Manus embraces the duration of 994 Maha Yugas, which is equal to: . . . . . 
Add Sanhis, i.e., intervals between the reign of each Manu, which amount to 6 Maha Yugas, is equal to: 
The total of these reigns and interregnums of 14 Manus, is 1,000 Maha Yugas, which constitute a Kalpa, 
or ONE DAY of BRAHMA: 
As Brahma's Night is of equal duration, 

Patron 

One Day and Night of Brahma would contain: . . . 8,640,000,000 
360 of such Days and Nights make 
One Year of Brahma which is equal to: . . . . . 3,110,400,000,000 
100 such years constitute the whole period 
of Brahma's Age, i.e., a Maha Kalpa: . . . . . 311,040,000,000,000 
These figures, although exoteric, fit in almost correctly with those of the secret calculations of the Atlanteans, and they are near enough for our purposes. Such Cosmic evolutions pertain to our Solar System only and not to the Universe as some presume. 
You will understand that a Yuga is an age, or Cycle. A Krita Yuga is also called a Satya Yuga, which means in both cases: 'the Age of Purity', or the 'Golden Age'. This Age always comes first in the series of four Ages or Yugas, and the Kali Age comes last. The Golden Age lasted until the middle of the Third Race. The Kali Yuga (in which we are now) is called the 'Black Age'. Each Yuga, or Age, at any particular time, is different for different Races. 
A Maha Yuga is, as you can see above, the aggregate of the Four Yugas, and forms a thousandth part of a 'Day of Brahmā'. 
A 'Manu' is the presiding Spirit — if personalised, the 'Creator', 'Ruler', and 'Guide' of a Race, a Round, or a Globe. 
A 'Round' is the great 'Life-wave' from the Source of all Being, vivifying successively the seven Globes that constitute a 'Planetary Chain'. As this creative energy passes on from one Planet to another, so does that Planet go into 'Pralaya', the period when the life of a world, chain or Solar System is partially or wholly 'indrawn'; activity or manifestation ceasing in part or in whole. The Pralaya of a Planet, the 'winter' between the Rounds of a Life-wave, is known as a 'Minor Pralaya'; and the Pralaya of a System as a 'Kosmic Pralaya'. During the Minor Pralayas, the Planets remain intact, though dead, just as a huge animal, caught and embedded in Polar Ice, remains the same for ages. When one Planet goes into Pralaya the next Planet awakes, and its latent activities begin to manifest. Seven Rounds constitute a Manvantara. 
Esoterically, every Manu, as an anthropomorphised Patron of his special Cycle, or Round, is but the personified idea of the Thought Divine. Each of the Manus, therefore, being the special God, Creator, and Fashioner of all that appears during his own respective Cycle of Being or Manvantara. 
Each Round has two Manus, a Root Manu and a Seed Manu. A 'Root Manu' is the general term for the Great Cause from which proceeds life and forms for the Round of a Planetary Chain; and a Planetary Chain is a series of seven globes or worlds which form the field of evolution during the Planetary Cycle or Manvantara. 
The first three of these Globes (see diagram on next page) generally known as A, B and C - form a descending arc, the densest physical matter of the descent being reached in the Fourth Globe, D, of which our Earth is an instance. The Fifth Globe E, on the ascending arc (corresponding to C on the descending arc), usually belongs to the Astral Plane, and the Sixth and Seventh, F and G (corresponding to B and A on the descending arc), to the so-called Rūpa and Arupa levels of the Mental Plane: these, therefore, are invisible to ordinary sight, and they are the three Secret Planets to which we have previously referred in the Lectures. 
The Globes in the arc of descent, and those in the arc of ascent, correspond with each other, those in the upward arc showing out in per- fection that which those on the downward arc adumbrate embryonically, while the Middle Globe is the point of conflict and turning. 
The complete Evolution of our System comprises Seven Planetary Chains successively brought forth, each chain being, as it were, a reincarnation of the preceding one. Three of these chains belong to the past; the Fourth is the Terrene, that of which the Earth forms the Fourth Globe; the remaining Three have yet to appear (see diagram). 
The 'Seed Manu' is a general term for the Great Effect into which humanity is gathered up at the close of each Round of a Planetary Chain. 
A Manvantara is, of course, the Cycle of Manifestation, as opposed to Pralaya or non-manifestation. It includes the Seven Rounds of the great Life-Wave of the Logos. 
Arupa means 'formless'. This term is most often used as a qualification of the Manasic Plane, the three Higher, or innermost conditions of this being described as the 'Arupa Levels'. Rūpa, means a body or form, but we must remember that the principle of form is to be found in every stage of the manifested Universe; and that when the phrase 'the formless world' is used, the word 'formless' is only true in relation to the worlds below the one so spoken of. All higher worlds are 'formless' regarded from below, that is, regarded by the organs of perception which are fitted for exercise in such lower worlds. 
Brahma, finally is the First Person of the Hindu Trinity; the name should be distinguished from Brahman (neuter) the Source of all Existence; although it has by no means always been done, either in the Hindu Scriptures or in modern writings. The Hindu Trinity, or Trimurti (assuming three aspects) consists of Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva. Vishnu represents the idea of evolution the process by which the inner Spirit unfolds and generates the universe of sensible forms. Shiva represents the idea of involution, by which thought and the sensible universe are indrawn again into quiescence; and Brahmā represents the state which is neither involution nor evolution and yet is both existence itself, now first brought into the region of thought through relation to Vishnu and Shiva. 
You should make yourself familiar with the above rough outline of the Cycles of the Solar System and the various terms, in view of later references to them. Studying the diagram accompanying this Lecture should help you in that process. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
