SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 9. 
Dear Disciple, 
We must now return to our interrupted studies of the Sun-Path discussions, broken off towards the end of Grade 1. 
There is a whole poem on the pregenetic battles fought by the growing planets before the final formation of Kosmos, similar 'battles' going on today in various galactic nebulæ in our Universe as well as in the untold millions of other universes, this accounting for the seemingly disturbed position of the systems of several Planets; the plane of the satellites of Neptune and Uranus for instance being tilted over, thus giving them an appearance of retrograde motion. The Planets are called the Warriors, the Architects, and are accepted by the Roman Church as the leaders of the Heavenly Hosts, thus showing the same traditions as those of the Ancient Teachings. Having evolved from Kosmic Space, the Sun, we are taught before the final formation of the primaries and the annulation of the planetary nebulae drew into the depths of his mass all the Cosmic vitality he could, threatening to engulf his weaker 'Brothers', before the Law of Attraction and repulsion was finally adjusted; after which, he began feeding on the "Mother's refuse and sweat"; in other words, on those portions of the Aether (the 'Breath' of the Universal Soul), of the existence and constitution of which Science is as yet absolutely ignorant. As one Scientist once theorised that the systems "are gradually changing by atmospheric conditions or substractions, or by accretions and diminutions arising from nebular substance", and again that "the sun may condense gaseous matter as it travels in space, and so heat may be produced" — the archaic teachings seem scientific enough even in this age; in spite of the symbolical language used in them. Other scientists have made similar suggestions, but none have come to a definite conclusion yet, for they do not know the Laws. 
In the Rig Veda, 'Aditi', the Boundless and Infinite Space, is the equivalent of 'Mother-Space', coeval with 'Darkness'. She is very properly called the "Mother of the Gods", Deva-Matri, as it is from her Cosmic matrix that all the heavenly bodies of our system were born Sun and Planets. Thus she is described, allegorically, in this wise: "Eight Sons were born from the body of Aditi; she approached the Gods with Seven, but cast away the eighth, 'Marttānda', our Sun". It is further explained as follows: "Eight houses were built by Mother, eight houses for her eight Divine Sons; four large and four small ones. Eight brilliant Suns, according to their age and merits. Bal-i-lu (Marttanda) was not satisfied, though his house was the largest. He began (to work) as the huge elephants do. He breathed (drew in) into his stomach the vital airs of his brothers. He sought to devour them. The larger four were far away; far, on the margin of their kingdom (the planetary system). They were not robbed (affected), and laughed. Do your worst, Sir; you cannot reach us, they said. But the smaller ones wept. They complained to the Mother. She exiled Bal-i-lu to the centre of her kingdom, from whence he could not move. (Since then) he (only) watches and threatens. He pursues them, turning slowly round himself; they turning swiftly from him, and he following from afar the direction in which his brothers move on the path that encircles their houses. (The Sun rotates on its axis always in the same direction in which the Planets revolve in their respective orbits, as astronomy teaches us). From that day he feeds on the sweat of his Mother's body. He fills himself with her breath and refuse. Therefore, she rejected him." 
Hermes taught about the Sun as follows: "The creation of life by the Sun is as continuous as his light; nothing arrests or limits it. Around him, like an army of satellites, are innumerable choirs of Genii. These dwell in the neighbourhood of the Immortals (the Planets and their Rulers) and thence watch over human things. They fulfil the will of the Gods by means of storms, tempests, transitions of fire and earthquakes; likewise by famines and wars, for the punishment of impiety. It is the Sun who preserves and nourishes all creatures; and, even as the Ideal World, which environs the sensible world, fills this last with the plenitude and universal variety of forms, so also the Sun, enfolding all in his light, accomplishes everywhere the birth and development of creatures. Under his orders is the choir of Genii, or rather the choirs, for these are many and diverse, and their number corresponds to that of the stars. Every Star has its Genii, good and evil by nature, or rather by their operation, for operation is the Essence of the Genii. All these Genii preside over mundane affairs, they shake and overthrow the constitution of States and individuals; they imprint their likeness on our Souls (Higher Minds), they are present in our nerves, our marrow, our veins, our arteries, and our very brain substance. At the moment when each of us receive life and being, he is taken in charge by the Genii who preside over births, and who are classed beneath the astral powers" (superhuman astral Spirits). 
The meaning of the last sentence is that as man is composed of all the Great Elements - Fire, Air, Earth and Water, as well as Aether the Elementals which belong respectively to these Elements feel attracted to man by reason of their co-essence, and the Element which predominates in a certain constitution will be the ruling Element throughout life. 
Hermes continues: "Perpetually they change, not always identically, but revolving in circles" (for cyclic progress is development). 
"They permeate by the body two parts of the soul, that it may receive from each the impress of his own energy." 
By the "two parts of the soul" Hermes meant the Higher and Lower Minds; for he says: "But the reasonable part of the soul is not subject to the Genii; it is designed for the reception of (the) God, who enlightens it with a sunny ray". (That 'God' is the Soul itself and also that RAY or Lord to which, or whom, it belongs by reason of its state of evolution). "Those who are thus illumined are few in number, and from them the Genii abstain: for neither Genii nor Gods have any power in the presence of a single ray of God". (The RAYS being themselves part of the Supreme Deity, the meaning of this sentence will be clear). "But all other men, both soul (Higher Mind) and body (Lower Mind), are directed by Genii, to whom they cleave, and whose operations they affect, the Genii have then the control of mundane things, and our bodies serve them as instruments." 
In the above Teaching by the Divine Hermes you may be able to find the clue to many things that have puzzled you in the past. It gives the reason for the behaviour of many men, especially such as are placed in great positions, in which capacity they seem to abuse the powers the 'Gods' or 'Genii' have placed in their hands. NOT SO!! They have still the same free-will, in spite of the seeming handicap caused by the 'control' of the Genii, for none of the latter, however powerful, can overcome the human being whose Higher Mind turns to the Light of his Soul — away from the dark shadows of the material. 
But alas! As Hermes says: "Those who are thus illuminated are few in number". The first requisite to gain this Illumination is the Secret Power of Peace; but how many have it? Even you, perhaps, in spite of fourteen months concentration on Peace, have it not always at your command! 
There are moments in the life of all when that Divine Peace, that great and powerful secret KEY, escapes us at certain moments of forgetfulness; just when we need it most. Regard such moments as lessons and reminders to be always on guard; for we are surrounded at all times by the hosts of genii attuned with the lower, material, conditions in the material Kosmos. Powerful are they if we succumb to their wiles: powerless if we hold on to that great, secret, and powerful weapon of Peace. 
Being free from those Elementals we have found Liberation and never again can we then be forced to return to Earth in a new incarnation, but instead we become One with the finer Realms, progressing on the Path of Evolution back to the Source! 
The Sun was always called by the Egyptians the 'Eye of Osiris', and was himself the Logos, the First-begotten, or Light made manifest to the world, "which is the Mind and Divine Intellect of the Concealed." It is only by the seven-fold ray of this light that we can become cognisant of the Logos through the Demiurge, regarding the latter as the 'Creator' of our Planet and everything pertaining to it, and the former as the guiding Force of that 'Creator' good and bad at the same time, the origin of good and the origin of evil. But when we speak of a 'Creator' we should always remember that the better term would be 'Fashioner'. Nothing in the Universe of Spirit and Matter was ever created. It always was and always will be, although you know that the material is subject to cyclic changes. 
Thus the 'Fashioners', 'Builders', 'Architects', are those so-called 'Creators' a word which has 'slipped into' theological terminology as it were, because the real meaning of the term was unknown. The 'Creator' or 'Fashioner' is neither good nor bad per se, but its differentiated aspect in Nature make it assume one or the other character. 
With the invisible and the unknown Universes disseminated through Space, none of the Sun-Gods had anything to do, as is shown very clearly in the Book of Hermes, and in very ancient folk-lore. 
May you be bathed in the streams of Light and filled with Divine Inspiration. 
Your Hidden Master. 
