SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 8. 

Dear Disciple, 
Your Hidden Masters would now like you to consider the following Teaching in the Light of what they have told you in the previous Lectures: 
"The Mother is the fiery Fish of Life, She scatters her Spawn and the Breath (motion) heats and quickens it. The Grains (of Spawn) are soon attracted to each other and form the Curds in the Ocean (of in fiery Space). The larger lumps coalesce and receive new Spawn Dots, Triangles and Cubes, which ripen, and at the appointed time some of the Lumps detach themselves and assume spheroidal form, a process which they effect only when not interfered with by the others. After which the Secret Law comes into operation. Motion (Breath) becomes the Whirlwind and sets them into rotation." 
The above paragraph is one of the ancient commentaries to the most important Book on the Secret Science. Please send us your version of its real meaning; and this should not be very difficult if you remember our previous teachings. We want each student to learn the technique of reading and understanding such Literature; it is the only way to make proper progress in your Occult Studies. 
In a certain polemical scientific work the author criticises the position assumed by the astronomers as follows; "It is to be regretted that the advocates of this (nebular) theory have not entered more largely into the discussion of it (the beginning of rotation, to wit). No one condescends to give us the rationale of it. How does the process of cooling and contracting the mass impart to it a rotary motion?" 
It is not materialistic Science that can ever solve it. "Motion" says an Occult Teaching, "is eternal in the unmanifested, and periodical in the manifest". It is when heat caused by the descent of Flame into primordial Matter causes its particles to move, which motion becomes the “Whirlwind”. A drop of liquid assumes a spheroidal form owing to its atoms moving around themselves in their ultimate, unresolvable, and noumenal essence; unresolvable for Physical Science, at any rate. 
Everything in the Universe progresses steadily in the Great Cycle, while incessantly going up and down in the smaller cycles. Nature is never stationary during a Manvantara, as it is ever becoming, not simply being; and mineral, vegetable and human life are always adapting their organisms to the then reigning elements; and therefore those Elements were always fitted for them under all sorts of conditions, as they are now fitted for the life of the present humanity. The great metaphysician Hegel held a similar opinion. For him Nature was a perpetual becoming. This is, of course, a purely Esoteric conception. Creator or origin, in the Christian sense of the term, is absolutely unthinkable. As Hegel said: "God (the universal Spirit) objectivises Himself as Nature, and again rises out of it". The immutable Law of Nature is Eternal Motion, cyclic and spiral therefore progressive even in its seeming retrogression. The One Divine Principle, the nameless THAT of the Vedas, is the Universal Total, which, neither in its spiritual aspects and emanations, nor in its physical atoms, can ever be at "Absolute Rest" except during the Nights of Brahmā, and then only in respect of the physical, material part of Nature. Hence, the "First-Born" are those who are first set in motion at the beginning of a Manvantara, and thus the first to fall into the lower spheres of materiality. In Plato's Cratylus he derives the word Theos (Deus or God) from the verb the-ein, "to move", as suggested by the motion of the heavenly bodies which he connects with the Deity. According to the Esoteric Philosophy, this Deity, during its "Nights" and its “Days”, is the "Eternal perpetual Motion”, the “Ever- Becoming", as well as the Universal Present, and the "Ever-Existing". The latter is the root-abstraction; the former is the only possible conception in the human mind, if it disconnects this Deity from any shape or form. It is a perpetual, never-ceasing evolution, circling back in its incessant progress through aeons of duration into its original status...Absolute Unity. 
Before we go any further we must give you an additional candle- exercise in connection with Motion. Place a lighted candle in front of a mirror, right in the centre of it and about three inches away from it. Sit two or three feet away from the candle and right in front of it. Relax. Concentrate on the candle's aura. It is not necessary to change its colour, for it contains all the colours of the rainbow or spectrum in their proper order in any case. When you see the aura properly, will it to rotate round the flame. You can achieve this rotation if you first of all fix your gaze - from the back of the head of course 
upon one spot on the outside rim of the aura, and direct the gaze slowly around it in an anti-clockwise direction. As soon as the aura commences to turn, hold your gaze steadily fixed on the flame itself. If you have followed our instructions properly and conditions are good you will see the continuous circular movement of the aura. After, say, 30 seconds or even a minute, will it to stop. Then, will it to revolve clockwise, but hold your gaze steadily fixed on the flame this time. After you have tried this exercise a dozen times you will find that you need not set the aura in motion yourself, but that it will rotate in either of the two 
directions at your mental command. This is an excellent concentration exercise, which will be developed later in connection with other Laws. Please keep on working away at all your other meditation and concentration exercises as well. The above test will also prove to you that mind can control matter, for the aura is matter in an etherealised form; though still earthly. 
The Ogdoad, or number eight, symbolises the eternal and spiritual motion of cycles; the 8, or the same figure lying sideways, is symbolised in turn by the Caduceus, which, as you know, is the symbol of Mercury; the winged rod with the two entwined serpents. It shows the regular breathing of the Kosmos, presided over by the Eight Great Gods the Seven from the primeval Mother (making eight), and the One and the Triad; the latter two symbols having several meanings which we shall discuss later. The Pleiades (Alcyone especially), are considered, even in Astronomy, as the central point around which our Universe of fixed stars revolves, the focus from which, and into which, the Divine Breath, Motion, works incessantly during the Manvantaras. 
The Pleiades (or Seven Sisters) are the central group of the system of sidereal symbology. They are situated in the neck of the constellation Taurus, and regarded by many Astronomers as the central group of the Milky Way, and in the Kabalah and in Eastern Esotericism, as the sidereal septenate, born from the first manifested side of the upper triangle, the concealed A. This manifested side is Taurus, the symbol of One (the figure 1), or of the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, Aleph (), "bull" or "ox", whose synthesis is Ten (10), or Yod, the perfect letter or number. 
Hence, in the sidereal symbols of the Occult Philosophy, it is this circle with the starry cross on its face which plays the most important part. Occult Science teaches us that everything in the Universe, as well as the Universe itself, is formed (created) during its periodical manifestations by accelerated Motion set into activity by the Breath of the Ever-to-be-Unknown Power, unknown to present mankind at any rate, within the phenomenal world. 
Motion is the abstract Deity; on the highest Plane it is Arūpa, absolute; but on the lowest it is merely mechanical. Psychic action is within the sphere of physical motion. Ere psychic action can be developed in the brain and nerves, there must be adequate action which generates it on the physical plane. Psychic wisdom, for this reason, is therefore merely "seeing" on a plane of different material density, or on Planes two, three and four; please never lose sight of that. But spiritual vision sees by the light within, the light hidden beneath the "bushel" of the human body, by which we can see clearly and independently of all "outside". As the so-called "Psychic" sees by an external light, his vision is coloured by the nature of that light. Yet sight is but a mode of motion!! 
Absolute Eternal Motion is Parabrahman, the Concealed Supreme Deity; it is nothing and yet everything; a form of motion inconceivably rapid; and this motion throws off a film which is Energy. It thus transforms itself into the eternal primordial Substance from which comes all Manifestation, which is still Energy. This Energy, still transforming itself in its ceaseless and inconceivable motion becomes the Atom, and then it is on the so-called Third Plane, which is not the Third Plane we have been mentioning hitherto, but one which will be discussed later. 
In the East “annihilation is Nirvana", refers but to matter: that of the visible as well as the invisible body, for the Astral body, the personal double, is still matter as you know, however sublimated. 
Buddha taught that the primitive Substance is eternal and unchangeable. Its vehicle is the pure, luminous ether, the boundless, infinite space. Not a void resulting from the absence of forms, but on the contrary, the foundation of all forms. This denotes it to be the creation of illusion, all the works of which are as nothing before the uncreated form (Spirit), in whose profound and sacred depths all motion must cease for ever, But Motion here refers only to the illusive objects to their change as opposed to perpetuity, rest; perpetual motion being the Eternal Law, the ceaseless Breath of the Absolute. 
Occult Science teaches that the reconstruction of the Universe after a "Night" takes place in this wise: At the periods of new genera- tion, perpetual motion becomes Breath, from the Breath comes forth primordial Light, through whose radiance manifests the Eternal Thought concealed in Darkness, and this becomes the Word. It is THAT (the Word) from which THIS (the Universe) sprang into being. 
Eliphas Levi says: "This (the concealed Deity) radiated a Ray into the eternal Essence (Waters of Space) and, fructifying thereby the primordial Germ, the Essence expanded, giving birth to the Heavenly Man from whose Mind were born all forms". 
We may state here also that the secret meaning of the word 'Brahmā' is ‘expansion', 'increase', or 'growth'. 
In the Kabalah you will find a statement very similar to that of Eliphas Levi's, replacing the word 'above' by that of ‘in', as there cannot surely be any 'above' or 'under' in the Absolute; for this is what Levi also states: "Above the waters the powerful Breath of the Elohim; above the Breath the Light; above the Light the Word, or the Speech that created it". 
We have now come to the end of our discussions on the term "Motion", and if you will compare our teachings with those of Science you will ascertain the great difference between them: and we hope that we have made ourselves clear enough for you to accept these TRUTHS. 
We have also come to the end of our second side of the First Triangle of Grade 2, and if there is anything you wish to write about we shall be glad to hear from you as usual. But we should like to hear how you are progressing with the various exercises in any case as well as receiving your own interpretation of the passage we have given you for meditation on the 'Fiery Fish of Life' in this Lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
