SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 
Grade 2. Number 15. 
Dear Disciple, 
The complete set of endocrine glands resembles an orchestra, where one member being out of tune can upset all the rest. The absence of a duct in the endocrine glands has more than an anatomical significance, and their secretion is not limited in its range to any particular part or organ into which the duct may open, but passes directly into the blood or lymph stream, to exert an influence on any tissue or function of the whole organism. 
The most familiar of these glands is the Thyroid Gland, situated in the throat and the importance of its influence on the development, growth and final make up of the individual cannot be exaggerated. Although this gland weighs little more than one ounce, three pairs of large arteries unite to form a network of blood vessels in and around the gland, and after the gland cells have done their work, this tide of blood is returned to the system through an elaborate plexus of great veins. The fact that the whole of the blood in the body can pass through this organ in a relatively short time, proves that the thyroid is a laboratory in which are concocted various substances of vital import- ance to the individual. Under certain conditions, this organ can do the work of other glands whose function is temporarily impaired. From a medical point of view the thyroid, and its associated endocrine glands, plays an important part in the development of mind and character and a slight preponderance of one or other set of glands has a profound influence in determining the temperament of the individual. At the same time we are informed that they respond instantly to the emotions 
- and the emotions are part of the Higher and Lower Mind. 
Other glands we would mention are the Suprarenals (also known as the adrenal glands) which are of such great importance that without them life could not be maintained for a single day. They are set close to the upper pole of each kidney and they also take three good-sized arteries to supply each of them with blood; which means that the whole of the blood supply passes through them in a very short time. These glands secrete about 30 different hormones, the most important of which is adrenaline, which is responsible for the sudden outbursts of energy which each one of us requires from time to time, but many people make unnecessary demands by their constant state of mental agitation. 
To maintain good health the subject of Diet is of great importance. Faulty diet causes ill health and your food should contain a wide range of different factors. If we first grasp the principles involved we can then see how to apply them to everyday needs. 
Mark Twain once said that: "part of the secret of success in life is to eat what you like and let the food fight it out inside." This advice is partly true, and it is certainly true that some people worry far too much about their digestions, whereby their very anxiety causes the evil they are seeking to avoid. It is much better to take an intelligent interest in the food we eat, in order to create that healthy appetite so necessary for the digestive functions. 
The most obvious function of food is to supply material for body-building (growth and renewal of tissue) but this uses up only a small proportion of the food we eat; nearly all the rest is used for fuel to provide energy and heat. The body fuel consists of organic compounds, which are oxidised by the oxygen taken in by the lungs during breathing. 
In splitting up food into two main factors, i.e. body-building and fuel (energy), we find that the chief body builders are proteins, mineral elements, vitamins and water. Carbohydrates, fats and some kinds of proteins serve as fuel. It will be noted that proteins often serve both functions. Proteins, carbohydrates and fats are present in far larger quantities in food than either mineral elements or vitamins. Protein is predominant in lean meat, white fish and some nuts; carbohydrates in sugars, cereals, vegetables and fruits; fats in foods such as butter, dripping etc. The mineral elements and vitamins will be discussed later. 
vitan Proteins contain the elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen and usually sulphur; phosphorus is also present in some proteins such as casein, the chief protein in milk. As stated, some proteins can be used in the body as fuel, but their most important function is body-building. Proteins consist of a collection of simpler bodies called Amino-Acids, and they are not all of equal value because they do not all contain the Amino-Acids we require. Some Amino-Acids, such as glycine, can be manufactured in the human body, therefore they do need not to be present in our food proteins, but there are a number which the body needs and cannot manufacture. The nutritive value of a protein thus depends on the Amino-Acids it contains. Generally speaking, proteins from food of animal origin (milk, cheese, eggs, fish and meat) contain a more useful selection of Amino-Acids than do those from plant food such as cereals, nuts, vegetables and fruits. For this reason animal proteins were called first class proteins and plant proteins termed second class. Proteins from animal food are very well absorbed, but proteins from plant foods leave an appreciable quantity of unabsorbed residue, which accounts for the discomfort sometimes experienced after eating vegetables such as peas 
and beans. In meat and fish (and certain plant foods) there are very small quantities (usually less than 0.3%) of non-protein organic compounds which contain nitrogen and are called extractives. This name was given to them because they can be extracted from food by boiling it in water. They are present in meat, gravy, meat soup, meat extracts etc. They play an important part in digestion by causing a flow of gastric juice when they reach the stomach. Soup nearly always contains extractives and is therefore an excellent course with which to start a meal, especially for people with weak digestions and feeble appetites. 
The term carbohydrates implies the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, the two latter being in the same proportion as in water, i.e. two atoms of hydrogen to one of oxygen. The group of carbohydrates includes all kinds of sugar and starch. If we eat more carbohydrates than we need to use as fuel, a small portion of the excess is turned into glycogen and stored in this form; the rest is stored as fat. 
Fats also contain the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, but here the proportion and arrangement are quite different. A striking difference is that fats contain much less oxygen in relation to the amount of carbon. The fat molecule consists of two portions; one portion is derived from glycerol (glycerine) and the other consists of three fatty acid groups which may be all alike or not. The difference in food value of the various fatty foods depends chiefly on the amount of vitamins they contain, rather than on the chemical nature of the fat itself. Fats are chiefly used in the body as fuel. The oxidation of fats is a slow complicated process and can only be carried to completion if carbohydrates are also present. If there are not enough carbohydrates present the oxidation stops short and biliousness occurs. The different fats are not digested at the same rate; the deciding factor is the melting point. If the melting point is either below or only slightly above body temperature (36.6째C) they are easily emulsified. Butter has one of the lowest melting points (32째C) and is readily digested. On the other hand Beef (45째C) and Mutton (50째C) fats have far higher melting points. 
There are mineral elements in all natural food, which enter into the composition of all our body fluids and are necessary for the performance of innumerable physiological processes. Most of these elements are present in ordinary diets, although Calcium, phosphorus and iron are not always present in completely 'available' forms. Phosphorus occurs in some plant foods in an insoluble organic compound called Phytin, little or none of which is utilised by the body and some calcium is also lost because the ingested phytin may combine 
with it and render that 'unavailable' also. In certain cereals, nuts, peas and beans, about half the phosphorus is phytin phosphorus. Fortunately, all the phosphorus in meat and fish is in an 'available' form. The only Iron the body can use to any extent is inorganic Iron, luckily there are foods that are relatively rich in available iron and these include cooked liver, some green vegetables such as spinach, pulses and beans, oatmeal, eggs, brown bread and many fruits. 
There are few factors in our food which can be absorbed by the body without having to undergo a chemical change, and this change is brought about by means of substances known as Enzymes which are present in the various gastric juices. The nervous system (controlled by the Mind) plays an important part on the enzymes, and the first to be encountered by the food is present in the saliva of the mouth. The very thought of attractive food is enough to cause a flow of saliva and if the anticipation of good food arouses pleasant sensations, the gastric juices begin to flow even before the food is tasted. The secretion of gastric juice on the other hand is diminished by adverse circumstances. Hot food increases both the frequency and strength of the muscular move- ments of the stomach, but worry stops the movements and leads to nervous indigestion. 
From the foregoing it would seem that the whole problem of nutrition resolves itself into a determination of the necessary number of calories in the diet and the proper proportion of protein, carbo- hydrate, fat, mineral elements and water, but evidence has gradually accumulated to prove that minute amounts of a natural food (such as milk) are necessary for growth. Natural foods contain accessory food factors which until the last century had been unsuspected. These factors are now known as Vitamins. The most striking feature of the vitamins as a class is the small amount necessary for health, in comparison with the total daily ration of food. Deficiencies however in the supply may lead to actual disease. The best known Vitamins are A, B1 (Thiamine), C (L-ascorbic acid), and D. 
Vitamin A. Fat soluble A or Vitamin A, the accessory food factor originally discovered in Milk was later found to contain two separate components. These were named Vitamin A and Vitamin D. When diets are deficient in Vitamin A the delicate membranes inside the body tend to dry up and break, thus allowing harmful bacteria to gain an entrance to the tissues. For instance, it is thought that lack of Vitamin A is a predisposing cause of pyorrhoea, as this vitamin is necessary for the proper development of the tissues near the root of the tooth. A sufficient quantity of Vitamin A keeps the mucous membranes of the 
body in proper working order as well as playing a vital role in the growth and repair of body tissues. 
It has another curious function in that it is necessary for the formation of a substance known as Visual Purple (Rhodopsin), which is present in the retina of the eye. Visual purple is bleached by light and is quickly regenerated by normal people, but in those who are suffering from a slight lack of Vitamin A, the visual purple takes longer to regenerate with the result that they cannot see properly in a dim light. This night blindness can be rapidly cured with foods such as Cod Liver Oil and Halibut Liver Oil which contain relatively large amounts of Vitamin A. This vitamin is also to be found in milk fat, cheese, eggs, butter and certain other animal fats (but not in vegetable fats such as Olive Oil). 
Carrots, yellow maize and a number of other yellow and orange- coloured plant foods contain a yellow pigment called Carotene which has properties almost identical with those of Vitamin A, in fact when we eat carotene it is changed into Vitamin A in the body. Other yellow and orange-coloured vegetables, fruits and cereals are tomatoes, apricots, peaches (fresh or dried), oranges, sweet potatoes, and pumpkins. Carotene is also found in spinach, asparagus, broccoli, lettuce and cabbage. The amount of carotene appears to be closely linked with Chlorophyll, probably because light is necessary for the formation of both. 
Further discussions on the Vitamins follow in our next lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
