SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 18. 
1 
Dear Disciple, 
Every item of fresh knowledge we acquire is cumulative, and we should live in such a manner today that we can welcome another Truth tomorrow. . . . but of new Truth there is none!! The best we can hope for as we proceed in life is that our degrees of Truth will become purer and higher, and this can be achieved only in a gradual manner. 

It has been said that it is only the bigot who, in the first flush of his discovery proclaims to the world that he has found the secret of existence. The true Philosopher waits for further developments. Thus it is with our teachings: they unfold gradually like a rose, until at last the complete flower of Truth shines forth in all its marvellous beauty. This is why we have Grades, an Inner Circle, and a Supreme Council in The Order. We expand our teachings from bud to flower, and even in our second Grade - early as it is in these studies of the Divine Wisdom the sepals are beginning to separate already, showing the splendour of the bloom to come to some small extent. Even in the First Grade of our Work elementary when compared with our later studies; sublime when placed into juxtaposition with that which so many "Orders" pretend to teach we have received numerous letters from our various students saying that our revelations were "shattering", "remarkable", “wonderful”, the most important day of the week being that day on which our lecture arrives. 

Such statements are perfectly understood by us; for they are true and correct in every sense, and we appreciate them deeply. But compare the Second Grade work at our present stage with that of the First Grade at the same point, and you will observe a great difference! Already we are sounding the depths of deepest Philosophy and Divine Science here and there; but when we shall be really exploring the inner regions whether one regards them as mysterious deeps of knowledge or sublime and radiant heights, or as an inmost penetration into the realms of supreme Wisdom the scenes will be utterly dazzling, elevated, exciting and awe-inspiring. In short, there are no superlatives in the language to give an adequate description of just what your Higher Mind can and will experience. Yet - the approach will be so gradual that there can be no shock, bewilderment or fear. You will "get there" without knowing it; but if we had plunged you into these regions right away from the beginning you would have been so stunned that your mind could not have grasped the conditions and the Truths. 
 
It is necessary for us to point out these things at times, for you should have a true realisation of your progress in the studies if you wish to reap any real benefit from them. It will do you good to think about these things. As Hare has said; "The greatest Truths are the simplest; and so are the greatest men"; but no great Truth can be fully appreciated in all its simplicity until we have learnt to distinguish it without fail from falsehood; and there is more of the latter in this world of illusion than of the former. Most people wander about in false illusions from birth to death, to dwell even after that in further illusion. What is greater than Truth? A French proverb says that people's affection may be attracted by the qualities which we affect, but they can only be won by those we really possess. 
What is Truth? 
They who do not feel the darkness will never look for the Light; but "He that has Light within his own clear breast may sit in its centre and enjoy bright day", as Milton once stated. 
Is Truth then a Light? No answer other than "Yes", emphatically!! is possible here of course. Well then, it is the Light of Truth that we are seeking in our studies; to this you will agree. 
Again we ask you to think about these things. 
And this brings us to our next question; for by asking you some questions in this lecture, we, your securely Hidden Masters, hope to learn something in the Light of Truth from the answers. You probably know the famous saying of Thomas à Kempis; "He that well and rightly considereth his own works, will find little cause to judge hardly of another”. So let us benefit from the thoughts of others on the subject of "thinking" and sit at the feet of these great thinkers for a little while, benefiting from their conclusions on the subject of thinking, or Thought; for thought is a very great subject indeed in connection with the Occult Teachings. If it had not been for the great Thoughts of the uncountable number of Divine Sages the world has never known, there could be no Occult Science. So let us try to throw the Light of Truth on the subject of Thought, and let us - above all — treat it Scientifically! 
What is Thought? 
(1). It is the process or the product of thinking. 
The word 'Thought' is used very loosely in current psychology. Strictly defined, thought is the final and most complex term in the series of mental formations based upon sensation; the series which rises through perception and idea to the association of ideas, judgement, etc. Thought is always carried on in verbal ideas; always implies active attention; and is accompanied by and resolved upon one or other of the intellectual sentiments (difficulty, obscurity, curiosity, agreement, etc). It is the 
counterpart of active imagination, and forms the subject-matter of logic, as imagination forms that of aesthetics. 
(a). In the most concrete sense, a single step in the process of thinking; an idea; a notion; a reflection. 
"They are never alone", said I, "that are accompanied with noble thoughts". (Sir Philip Sidney. 'Arcadia'). 
"Truth shall nurse her, Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her". (Shakespeare. Henry viii. Act 5, scene 5, verse 30). 
"Some to conceit alone their taste confine, And glittering thoughts struck out at every line". (Alexander Pope. 'An Essay on Criticism', Part 1, 290). 
"To me the meanest flower that blows can give Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears". (Wordsworth. ‘Ode: Intimations of Immortality'). 

(b). The condition or state of a person during such mental process. 
"Horn sat upon the grunde; 
Him thughte he was ibunde". 
(King Horn, re-edited for the Early English Text Society by G.H. McKnight, 1901, p.32). 
"Sir Bedivere....paced beside the mere, 
counting the dewy pebbles, fix'd in thought". (Tennyson. 'Morte d'Arthur'). 
(c). A synonym of cognition in the common threefold division of modes of consciousness: from the fact that thought, loosely used as described above, embraces every intellectual process from the bare sensation to the highest elaborations of constructive reasoning. 
(d). The Objective aspect of the intellectual process. 
"Thought always proceeds from the less to the more determinate, and, in doing so, it cannot determine any object negatively, or determine it negatively without determining it positively." 
(E. Caird, 'Critical Philosophy of Kant', pp313). 
"Thought is, in every case, the cognition of an object, which really, actually, existentially out of thought, is ideally, intellectually, intelligibly within it; and just because within it in the latter sense, is it known as actually without in the former. ('Mind'. No. 35. July 1884). 
(e). A judgement or mental proposition, in which form the concept always appears. 
"Thought proper, as distinguished from other facts of consciousness, may be adequately described as the act of knowing or judging things by means of concepts". (Dean Mansell, 'Prolegomena logica', pp22). 
(f). An argument, inference, or process of reasoning, by which process the concept is always produced. 

"Without entering upon the speculations of the Nominalists and the Realists, we must admit that, in the process of ratiocination, properly called thought, the mind acts only by words". 
(Inaugural Addresses of Theodore W. Dwight and George P. Marsh in Columbia College, New York, 1869). 
(g). An intellectual standpoint, considered as something which, under the influence of experience has a development of its own, more or less independent of individual caprices, and that (1) in the life of an individual, and (2) in history: as, the gradual development of Greek thought. 
(h). The subjective aspect of the intellectual process; thinking as known by introspection. 
"By the word thought I understand all that which so takes place in us that we ourselves are immediately conscious of it. 
(René Descartes, 'The Principles of Philosophy'). 
(i). The Understanding Intellect. 
"For our instruction to impart Things above earthly thought". (Milton. 'Paradise Lost'. vii. 82). 
"What never was seen or heard of may yet be conceived; nor is anything beyond the power of thought, except what implies an absolute contradiction". 
(David Hume. 'An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding'). 
(j). An intention; a design; a purpose; also, a half-formed determination or expectation with reference to future action: with of: as 
"I have thought of going to London". 
"They have not only thoughts of repentance, but general purposes of doing the acts of it at one time or another". (Stillingfleet, 'Sermons' 11,111). 
"The sun was very low when we came to this place, and we had some thoughts of staying there all night; but the people gave us no great encouragement". 
(Pococke. 'Description of the East'. 11.1.1 06). 
Next week, we shall develop this theme a little further. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
