SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 1. 
Dear Disciple, 
Your Hidden Masters welcome you warmly upon your entrance to the studies of the Second Grade of the Outer Circle of our Work. We have received a number of most complimentary and satisfactory letters from those students who, like you, have decided to carry on. And it gives us much pleasure to state that the only students who have relinquished these studies are those who have been reluctantly forced to lay them aside owing to external pressures of one kind or another. 
- 
When a number of persons are busy with research work such as that which we are engaged on, there is formed or should be 
a bond of friendship and comradeship which is one of the essentials for proper progress. And though none of you have made any physical contact with your Hidden Masters (as far as you know), that bond is very real and actual. We know that this is so, and we are sure that you have felt it consciously or subconsciously. This is as it should be, for in the ultimate we are all One as children of the Father; Flames of His Flame; and if only all human beings were sufficiently evolved, that same bond would knit all together in such a way that all strife, misunderstanding, jealousy and hatred would cease at once. But, alas, that is not possible, for there are always coming into incarnation the various hosts of beings at every stage of evolution and it is impossible that the lower evolved ones, or the ones on the Seven different Rays, should be in complete sympathy, one with' another and form on Earth that great Brotherhood which will be formed eventually in the higher planes of Being. We have stressed the fact, in our First Grade, that all on the material planes is illusion, and that all material phenomena are but reflections of those on the spiritual planes. This is true; but in order to make clearer to you the words 'Illusion' and 'Reflection' it is necessary to examine the inner meanings of these words a little. 
We have spoken before of the 'Seven Keys of Enlightenment' which will unlock the treasure chambers of the Mysteries. There are seven such keys to both the material and Spiritual Regions; and every single phenomenon has fourteen different meanings and explanations. Perhaps you will think that this is far-fetched! But we assure you that this is not so. All is based on the sevenfold Natures of all things, conditions and beings. Let us take, for instance, the word 'Reflection', and apply it to the Law that all material phenomena are 'mirrored' upon the 'Veils of Illusion' from the Spiritual Regions, so that Man does not perceive Actuality in the First Four Higher Realms, but Reality, viz., that which is realised by the senses or the lower mind and accepted (for the time being) as Truth by the Higher Mind. 
Are these 'reflections' thrown upon the screen of Illusion in a reversed manner, such as we behold in an ordinary glass or metal mirror? Yes! They are. But do we see them in their reversed state? No! We do not; for just as the mind sees material things in their correct position, in spite of the fact that everything is received and reflected by the retina of the eye upside down, on account of the mind's ability to correct that inverse reflection immediately when the light-impulses reach the visual centre of the brain, so does the mind behold all phenomena reflected upon the mirrors of the veils of illusion in their correct positions too by reversing them all as soon as they are manifested. Thus, by means of this entirely automatic and unconscious process, you perceive each reflection exactly as it exists in the spiritual prototypes; although you should remember that in the case of the prototypes there is no actual material form, but only a spiritual thought-form, which is nevertheless as actual as that which we realise by the senses. 
You may ask: "Why do our minds not reverse the reflections we see in the mirror too, so that we shall see them as they actually are, and not reversed?" This would be a very sensible question indeed; but you should realise that we see reflections in an ordinary mirror as they are within it! If the mirror had a mind it would do the same things our minds do correct the reflection. But being a material substance on the lowest scale of evolution; mindless, although all its atoms etc., are alive, though this life is latent as far as we can see it with our material eyes, the mirror, as an entity, cannot reverse to its correct position that which it reflects, and the image is seen by us in the actual position it has assumed within the mirror, and we cannot reverse it, unless we have such powers that by a species of mental gymnastics we are enabled to do so!! But there is no need for this, and we are content to acknowledge the fact that all things seen in an ordinary mirror are reversed. Nor are they upside down, for the reason that the mirror is not constructed on the same principles as the retina of the eye. 
We might go further and concede to the mirror the power of seeing things on the material plane in their correct positions there, namely: as reflections from the spiritual. We may go still further and say that a reflection in a mirror does not exist any more than an object it reflects, the latter being an illusion in any case, the same as the mirror itself, and that therefore the whole theory, doctrine and law are based on false premises, and we should be correct in our reasoning in that way too, for reasoning in itself is but an exercise of the intellect on the material plane, and therefore is an added illusion, without actual existence in fact!! 
— 
We have told you before how extremely difficult it is to decipher a symbol, parable or Occult statement. The reason being as we maintained and maintain, that there are always seven keys to everything. From what we have said above - applying a few of these keys on the material plane in reference to the subject of material reflection you have here a further instance of how dangerous it is to jump to a conclusion about anything and proclaim that you have found a fact, a truth or a law. Knowing that the number 7 is doubled, the difficulties increase, and it behoves us, as students of Occult Science, to be still more careful with our conclusions! 
When our Higher Mind creates or evokes a thought, the representative sign of that thought is self-engraved upon the astral fluid, which is the receptacle and, so to say, the mirror of all the manifestations of being. In the 'Shankara' it is stated that: “The enlightened Disciple having attained that primal consciousness, absolute bliss, of which the nature is truth, which is without form and action, abandons this illusive body that has been assumed by the Higher Mind just as an actor (abandons) the dress" (put on for a while in connection with his rôle). 
The faculty above the ratiocinating mind, which is spiritual discernment or cognition, is the Pure Reason exercising the discriminative faculty of intuition. That faculty in itself is but a mirror which reflects absolute bliss; and, moreover, that reflection itself is yet not free from ignorance, and is not the Supreme Spirit, since it is still subject to conditions, is a spiritual modification of original substance, the substance of the ALL, that which forms the archetypes of existent things, God as viewed objectively, neither force nor matter, but the root out of which these are manufactured, and only an effect. Spirit alone is the one real and eternal substratum of all, the Essence and the Absolute Knowledge, never the Reflection. From the ever present and unchangeable Root springs the material Universe, not only past, present and future (which are but human and finite ideas expressed by finite thought), but in its totality of Absolute Being, with the past and future crystallised in an eternal Present, and in that Universe is expressed the Divine Thought, itself reflected in a secondary manifested Cause. The incorporeal corporealities such as appear in a mirror, and the abstract forms we see, hear and smell in our dreams and visions are as much 'realities' as anything else in the worlds of Illusion. 
Solar 'flames' seen through telescopes are reflections, says Occultism. "Whatever they are", says one Scientist, "it is evident they are the immediate source of Solar heat and light. Here we have a surrounding envelope of photogenic matter" But that 'matter' is just like the reflection in a mirror of the flame from a 'photogenic' lamp-wick!! "which", he continues, "pendulates with mighty energies, and by communicating its motion to the ethereal medium in stellar space, produces heat and light in far distant worlds." We have said that those forms have been compared to certain organisms, and Herschell says: "Though it would be too daring to speak of such organisations as partaking of life”, (Why not? asks Occult Science) “yet we do not know that vital action is competent to develop heat, light and electricity" He continues: "Can it be that there is truth in this fine thought. May the pulsing of the vital matter in the central sun of our system be the source of all that life which crowds the earth, and without doubt overspreads the other planets, to which the sun is the mighty minister?" 
Occultism answers all those queries of Science in the affirmative; and Science will find one day that we are right in our teachings of this as well as so many other laws which Science has 'discovered'. 
There are several philosophical systems in which Man is regarded as 'The Third Logos'. The Esoteric meaning of the word 'Logos' - Speech, or Word, or Verbum — is the rendering in objective expression, as in a photograph, of the concealed Thought. The Logos is the mirror reflecting Divine Mind, and the Universe is the mirror of the Logos, though the latter is the esse of that Universe. As the Logos reflects all in the Universe of Plerôma (which is a term used by the Gnostics and Church Fathers for the Kosmos as fullness, or all- pervading Existence and all-containing Reality; and which Occultism describes as 'a Force spread throughout the whole Universe, with its direct and indirect effects'), so Man reflects in himself all that he sees and finds in his Universe, the Earth; thus reflecting all things back to their natural position. 
St. Paul called our world: "the enigmatical mirror of pure truth", and St. Gregory of Nazianzen corroborated Hermes by stating that: "Things visible are but the shadow and delineation of things we cannot see". It is an eternal combination, and images are repeated from the Higher Planes down to the lower. The 'Fall of the Angels', and 'The War in Heaven', are repeated on every rung of the ladder, and each repeating it in its own way. It is all as expressed in the following few sentences of the 'Desatir': 
"All that is on Earth, saith the Lord (Ormazd), is the shadow of something that is in the superior Spheres. This luminous object (light, 
fire, etc.,) is the shadow of that which is still more luminous than itself, and so on till it reaches me, who am the light of lights.” 
In the Kabalistic books, especially in the Zohar, the idea that every objective thing on Earth or in this Universe is the 'Shadow' of the eternal Light, or Deity, is very strong. 
Leibnitz refers to the 'Monads', every one of which is a living mirror of the Universe, every Monad reflecting every other. Compare this view and definition with certain Sanskrit stanzas (Slokas) translated by Sir William Jones, in which it is said that the creative source of the Divine Mind, "Hidden in a veil of thick darkness, formed mirrors of the atoms of the world, and cast reflection from its own face on every atom." 
In this Lecture, then, you have been presented with several of the secret keys explaining the meanings of mirror, reflection and Illusion. May your 'inner point' ever reflect the Hidden Light; thus illuminating all your thoughts and meditations. 
Your Hidden Master. 
