SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 16. 
Dear Disciple, 
Vitamin B1 otherwise known as Thiamine is closely associated with Beriberi, a disease of the nervous system which results in a special type of paralysis. This disease is chiefly confined to the rice eating countries, where the natives live almost entirely on polished white rice. Vitamin B1 is to be found in the outer layers of the rice grain and the addition of these outer layers to the diet prevents Beriberi. 
In Europe there is a small amount of Vitamin B1 in many foods. Those especially rich include yeast, Marmite, the 'germ' of cereals, peas, beans, lentils, nuts, egg-yolk and meat, especially Pork, Ham, Kidney and Liver. The amount of Vitamin B1 in wheat and other cereals depends upon the inclusion of the germ (embryo) and the bran. The Endosperm which occupies most of the grain is deficient in Vitamin B1. Wholemeal Brown Flour therefore contains Vitamin B1, but White Flour contains little or none, since the bran and embryo are removed during the process of milling, as they are with polished rice. 
Vitamin B6 Pyridoxine and related compounds. First concentrated by Birch and Gyorgyi 1936. This Vitamin is widely distributed both in plant and animal tissue, and more uniformly than most other compounds of the B complex. Meat, Liver, Vegetables and the outer coats (bran) of cereal grains are all good sources. 

Vitamin B12 Cyanocobalamin and related substances. Isolation of this crystalline was achieved in 1948. Injection of this protein-free extract of liver is effective in the treatment of Addisonian anaemia (also called pernicious anaemia). 
Vitamin C - L-ascorbic Acid is the great antidote to Scurvy. It is also necessary for proper tooth formation and for the prevention of tooth decay and pyorrhoea. If we have an ordinary mixed diet we obtain a good supply of Vitamin C, especially rich sources of which are Papaya, Red peppers, Black Currants, Oranges, Lemons, Grapefruits, Strawberries, Gooseberries, Kiwi Fruits, Brussels sprouts, Spinach, Swedes, Potatoes, Asparagus and Tomatoes. The peel of oranges and lemons contains even more than the juice, and the same applies to the peel of apples and pears and both strawberries and gooseberries have more Vitamin C in the outer parts of the fruit than the centre. There is a small amount of Vitamin C in Milk and a good deal in Liver and other kinds of meat especially if it is uncooked. Fruit and vegetables should be as fresh as possible for they lose a considerable amount of their Vitamin C if stored for long. A certain amount of this Vitamin is lost in 
cooking and a short period of rapid heating does far less harm to Vitamin C than a slow simmering. The destruction of Vitamin C during storage is due to oxidation, but if foods are preserved, out of contact with the air, the Vitamin C will not be affected. For this reason there is little loss of the Vitamin in tinned fruit and vegetables. Paprika is especially rich in this Vitamin and can be made good use of in the preparation of many dishes. Those who enjoy spicy food will be pleased to learn that Science has recently discovered that the chilli pepper contains more Vitamin C than lemons or oranges! 
Vitamin D. Prevents and cures rickets, a deficiency disease, which is far more widespread than people realise. Apart from children, dogs and other animals suffer from it. Unfortunately, very few foods contain Vitamin D and it is not surprising that deficiencies occur so frequently. The ultraviolet rays from the Sun enable us to make our own Vitamin D. The human body contains a substance called Ergosterol which, when irradiated by the Sun, becomes Vitamin D. The object is to get suntanned but not sunburnt and this can be done by applying Olive Oil or some other oil to the skin before going out in the Sun. In temperate climates there may not be enough ultraviolet rays to provide children with as much Vitamin D as they require. The richest natural source of this Vitamin is Halibut or Cod Liver oil. Oily fish such as herrings, mackerel, sardines and tuna as well as egg yolks, milk, butter and cream are also fairly rich in this Vitamin. There is practically no Vitamin D in plant food. Scientists have recently discovered that Vitamin D plays an important role in boosting our immune system and fighting infection. 
 
Vitamin D2 Calciferol is manufactured by exposing Ergosterol, a sterol found in fungi and yeasts, to the action of ultraviolet light. One milligram of Calciferol contains 40,000 i.u. of Vitamin D. It is absent in almost all plant and animal tissues except for small amounts in certain fish-liver oils; used widely for therapeutics. 
Vitamin D3. This substance is the natural form of Vitamin D. A sterol widely distributed in animal fats, such as the oily secretions of mammalian skin and the oil of the preen glands of birds. 
Vitamin E — the Tocopherols and Tocotrienols. Finally synthesised in 1938. So far there is no proof that Vitamin E deficiency ever occurs in man. This Vitamin appears to act as an antioxidant in the body. Richest sources are fats of vegetable origin, particularly those derived from seeds and seed oils, like sunflower and safflower, corn, soya beans, peanut, coconut or cottonseed, with cereal products and eggs next in order. Scientists have identified, isolated and synthesised this Vitamin, but the medical fraternity do not seem yet to have found a use for it! 
Vitamin K and related substances. Finally isolated in 1939. Deficiency of this Vitamin prevents clotting of the blood. Vitamin K is necessary for normal formation of prothrombin in the liver. This is a substance present in the blood plasma and necessary for the normal clotting of blood. This Vitamin is found useful in treating newborn infants who show signs of bleeding. Vitamin K is found in fresh vege- tables of the dark-green variety such as kale, spinach, nettles etc. 
We have given a detailed summary of all the Vitamins known and used either in food or therapeutically. Table 1 below will give you a comprehensive idea of what they are and their effects. 

The question arises as to what proportion of the various food factors are necessary for the maintenance of health. A good deal depends upon the age and occupation of the people concerned, but in any case a reasonable amount of each should be included in the diet everyday. Protein (including animal protein) calcium, phosphorus, Iron and Vitamins A, B1, C and D are of special importance; the amount of carbohydrates and fat requires less attention. The latter, being mostly of fuel value, adjusts itself because, if people have enough to eat, they are certain to obtain as many Calories as they require. When the fuel requirements of the body have been met, the balance of Calorie- producing food (if digested) is stored up as fat and only those who are seriously underweight or overweight need to worry about the fuel proportion of their food. 
Heat is measured in Calories (from the Latin Calor-heat) and a great deal of work has been done by the human Calorimeter. Experiments show that during sleep the heat production of a healthy young man is about 65 Calories an hour. If he is lying down, but awake, 77 Calories, and if he assumes a sitting position the figure rises to 100 Calories an hour. (Remember what we told you about the Moon in connection with this) This striking result shows why it is beneficial for people to lie down when trying to renew their bodily strength. The Calorie output is greatly increased during exercise, and walking slowly (22 Miles per hour) uses up 200 Calories an hour. 2,600 Calories a day is the average requirement of a man whose work is sedentary, but as much as 3,600 is required for one doing manual work. From the age of 60 fewer Calories are needed and after the age of 70 about 1,800 Calories a day are usually sufficient. The amount of Calories needed represents net value and does not include the amount of waste in food preparation and cooking. In the modern sophisticated method the caloric value of food is broken up into component chemicals, but the following table will give an approximate idea of the net caloric value of some common foods. 
The average daily Protein allowance for a man weighing 70 kg (154 lbs.) advocated by physiologists in this country is 100 grams (about 31⁄2 oz.) which represents 0.65 grams per 227g (1 lb.) of body weight (or 0.28%). This amount seems extremely small, but it must not be forgotten that all protein foods contain a great deal of water. For instance, if we wish to obtain one whole day's supply of protein from one source it would be necessary to eat nearly 454g (1lb) of roast beef in order to do so, as roast beef contains 27% protein, 15% Fat, 1% Mineral Element and 57% Water. 
Half the daily ration of protein should be from animal sources i.e. meat, fish, eggs, milk or cheese. 
The daily intake of Mineral Elements such as chlorine, potassium, magnesium, copper and manganese are present in ordinary diets in sufficient amounts to satisfy our needs, but deficiencies in Calcium, Phosphorus, Iron and Iodine are a more serious matter and should be guarded against. These elements can be obtained from cheese, fish, meat etc. The following table shows the portions of foods which contain the required quantity; each article represents a complete supply. 

The daily requirement of Iodine is very small and only amounts to about 150μg (or 2 millionths of an ounce), sufficient is usually obtained from water, fish and other foods, except in districts where there is a deficiency in the water supply. 
It is not easy to economise on food, because several of the really necessary foods are fairly expensive. For instance Milk contains so many of the essential factors that it should be freely used by everyone. Eggs and butter are two more valuable items. There are a good number of foods that are not expensive such as: cheese, herrings, kippers, 
mackerel, potatoes, carrots, swedes, onions, broccoli, spinach, kale and watercress. Oranges and many other kinds of fruit, also dried fruits and dried pulses, beans, lentils and nuts all yield good value for money. Wholemeal bread contains Vitamin B1 and more 'available' Iron than White bread. 
Many people require a regular supply of plant residue (roughage) to keep the digestive system in good working order and thus prevent constipation. Vegetables, fruits and nuts, wholemeal bread, oatmeal, and jam containing pips and skins are rich in these substances. 
The ration of Water for an adult should be about 2 litres (4 pints) per day (including water in tea, coffee, juices etc). It is unwise to eat food that you cannot digest and it is physiologically unsound to eat food you dislike, because the secretion of the gastric juices is to a large extent under the control of the emotions. 
And now, having given you a thorough introduction to the Science of Nutrition we hope that its application will prove beneficial to you all. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
