Dear Disciple, 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 19. 

We will now take up the point from which we left off in our previous lecture and continue with our examination of the word "Thought.' 
(2). Plural. A particular frame of mind; a mood or temper. "I would not there reside, 
To put my father in impatient thoughts 
By being in his eye. 
(Shakespeare, Othello. Act 1, scene 3, lines 241-243.) 
(3). Doubt; perplexity. 
"Whan the lordes vnderstood that kynge Arthur was gon and lefte his londe, than thei hadde grete thought wherefore it myght be; and no wise cowde thei devise the cause". 
(Merlin). 
(4).Care; trouble; anxiety; grief. 
"There is another thynge... 
Which cause is of my deth for sorwe and thought". (Chaucer, Troilus and Criseyde) 
"In this thought and this anguyssh was the nayden by the coniurison of Merlin". (Merlin). 
"Take no thought (be not anxious) for your life, what ye eat, or what ye shall drink". (Matthew 6:25) 

"Gonzales was done to death by Gasca. Soto died of thought in Florida and Ciuill wars eate up the rest in Peru". (Purchas, Pilgrimage, 1613). 
(5). A slight degree; a fraction; a trifle; a little; used in the adverbial phrase a thought; as, a thought too small. "Here be they are every way as fair as she and a thought fairer, I trow". (Ben Jonson, Cynthia's Revels, 1601). 
"Though I now totter, yet I think I am a thought better". (Swift, Letter. 12 August 1727). 
Then we have the Elemental law of thought; Free Thought; New Thought; Objective Thought, or Objective Reason; Second Thoughts, or maturer or calmer reflection; upon or with a thought; with the speed of thought, or: in a twinkling; the game of 'What is my thought like?', and so on and so forth. 
In the Ancient Mystery Schools the studies took many, many years. When the student aspired to the heights he was trained almost from childhood, for in those more enlightened days the children were watched very carefully by the wise men, and any child showing signs of having come into incarnation endowed with certain gifts, was taken with the consent of the parents, of course and trained very carefully indeed. The external as well as the inward nature of all things was first made clear to his eyes, and he was not admitted to the practical initiation till not one earthly wish enchained the Higher Mind, or one carnal desire penetrated the same from the lower mind, unless fully controlled. It was realised in those enlightened times that the spirit can never wholly conquer the desires and passions of the 'matter' which clings to it as long as the Higher Mind is in a body. But by knowing this the wise men did not condemn any natural passions or desires. Far from it; but the aspirant was taught to exercise full control of such desires and passions, so that they should not obtain the upper hand and control the being in its higher aspects. There was no question of enforced celibacy, for instance; for it was well known that this is against the laws of nature. Nor does abstinence from the exercise of human functions lead to increased spiritual powers!! 
By saying this we know that we go directly against a host of spurious teachings on this subject; nevertheless we are entirely correct in our statements and know full well what we are talking about. Such conceptions as total abstinence are the result of complete and total ignorance of the true Principles of Man, although every one has, of course, full freedom to follow his own inclination in this way and any other way. Nay! Excesses will stunt spiritual growth, and that was guarded against as much as possible; and any neophyte who gave evidence that he could not learn to control his passions and keep them within reasonable limits was not admitted to initiation. This rule was later perverted into total abstinence - which is entirely wrong. 
To avoid the wide oscillations between Puritanism and licence the students were taught to find a just and even balance, and chastity was regarded as self-control within the field of the human Principles. For to a normal human being the normal physical functions hold no danger. In a normal human all functions should harmonise, one with another, including the emotional and intellectual, and even with the miraculous, if such should be present within the Higher Mind of a man or woman. P. D. Ouspensky says; "There are many Occult and religious systems which not only recognise this (i.e., total abstinence), but attempt to give practical directions as to how to curb the energy of sex and how to subject it to the interests of inner evolution. These directions are usually utterly fantastic and cannot give results, because they omit something 
which is most vital and most necessary" (A New Model of the Universe, 1931). We agree with this eminent Russian Scientist to the fullest possible extent. The sexologist, Havelock Ellis (1859–1939), reminds us that Macarius was the friend of St. Basil, a man who was in the mainstream of Christian tradition, and that the idea of true sublimation, of balance and control of all the human faculties recurs constantly in the later Christian Mystics. But, unfortunately, the pure doctrine of religion is seldom retained after the death of the founder. The true teaching of the Master is lost, and little by little the exponents of the religion bring it down to their own level. 
Modern Psychology has borrowed the idea of sublimation, although it has lost the conception of an inner evolution. By the word ‘sublimation' the present day psychologist implies that physical sexual desire, or 'libido' in the narrow sense, can be transformed into some impulse of a different nature, so that it ceases to be urgent as a physical need. But, as Havelock Ellis has remarked, although this conception is widely current in popular psychology, it is not generally realised that "this process of sublimation is a process involving much expenditure of force, and in its metaphysical and spiritual form far easier to talk about than to achieve". 
The German physician and sexologist, Magnus Hirschfeld (1868-1935) held the same view, and denied that the sexually abstinent yield intellectual products in art or science superior to those yielded by persons not sexually abstinent. Once the fundamental idea behind the idea of sublimation has been appreciated it will be obvious that it is a much abused word. Frequently it is employed to mean nothing more than the displacement of unchanged sex activity into another channel, substitution rather than sublimation. Such displacement is quite common, as in the case of Hirschfeld's "men engaged in strenuous motor activities". It also happens in the neurotic, where for sexual activity is substituted a morbid symptom; it happens in the prude, where for healthy sexual feeling is substituted a disgust with sex and all that is connected with it. It is well to bear in mind that even when some amount of sublimation has been achieved, a portion of the sexual impulse is generally left to be disposed of. More often than not in the non-religious man no sublimation has been achieved at all. The sexual urge flows inward, as in the case of the auto-erotic and narcissistic personalities, or else finds new channels in neurotic transformations. A virtue based on a fine idea is one thing, but seeming virtue that is rooted in fear is another. For these reasons, the wise men of the East in the olden times did not insist on total abstinence, nor did they advocate 'sublimation', for they knew the dangers connected with both these concepts. 
There were, of course, the virgin Temple youths and maidens, who were entrusted with certain duties; but they were expected to be 'pure' until such times as they reached the age when marriage was permitted, and even then they practised restraint instead of unbridled license, for such restraint was by then ingrained within the realms of their inner consciousness. Their thinking was of an order of purity that had become habitual. Their thoughts were like those which Professor Wilson refers to when he says: 
"Oh there are thoughts 
That slumber in the soul, like sweetest sounds, 
Amid the harp's loose strings, till airs from heaven On earth at dewy nightfall visitant, 
Awake the sleeping melody." 
Or they were like those which Thomas Middleton describes: "I look upon every true thought as a valuable acquisition to society, which cannot possibly hurt or obstruct the good effect of any other truth whatsoever; for they all partake of one common essence, and necessarily coincide with each other; and, like the drops of rain which fall separately into the river, mix themselves at once with the stream, and strengthen the general current." 
Scientists, such as F. K. C.L. Buchner, K. C. Vogt, and others, have stated that thought is molecular motion therefore; Matter. See Vogt; 'Physiologische Briefe', and 'Lectures on Man: his place in Creation and in the History of the Earth'. Also Buchner; 'Kraft und Stoff"; 'Natur und Geist'; 'Aus Natur und Wissenschaft'. The latter states; "Just as a steam engine produces motion, so the intricate organic complex of force-bearing substance in an animal organism produces a total sum of certain effects, which when bound together in a unity, are called by us Mind, Soul, thought". Here he postulates Force and mind as emanating from original matter - a materialistic monism. But in other parts of his works he suggests that mind and matter are two different aspects of that which is the basis of all things - a monism which is not necess- arily materialistic, and which, in the absence of further explanation, constitutes a confession of failure. 
In connection with our present study of what thought is we advise you to turn once more to Lecture Number 47, Grade 1; it will help you to see more in that Lecture than you noted before. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
