Dear Disciple, 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 11. 

That some of the really eminent Scientists had more than a mere 'idea' about the true nature of the Sun is proved by the undeniably correct surmises of Sir William Herschell; surmises which had nothing of the 'supernatural' bogey of Science in them, when he said that perhaps the Sun's being 'a globe of fire' was but a metaphorical supposition; a statement which caused the far less eminent colleagues to smile, for they saw (and see) in it purely an 'imaginative and fanciful theory'. 
Before the whole Esoteric System could be given out and appreciated by the astronomers, the latter would have to return to some of the 'antiquated ideas', not only of those of Herschell, but also to the true knowledge of the Hindu Astronomers, and thus abandon their own theories, which are none the less 'fanciful' because they have appeared so much later. First of all they would have to give up their 'ideas' of the Sun's semi or total solidity and incandescence; for although the Sun glows it does not burn. 
With regard to the so-called 'Willow-leaf Theory', termed thus because Herschell and Nasmyth both observed the pattern of willow-leaves in the Sun's aura, those 'objects' as Herschell called them, are, according to Occult Science, the immediate sources of Solar light and heat. And though the Esoteric Teachings do not regard these as 'organisms', as Herschell did, partaking of the nature of life, yet Occultism asserts that the whole Universe is full of such 'organisms', which are nothing less than the Solar and other Beings, conscious and active according to the proximity or distance of their Planets to, or from, our Plane of consciousness. The great astronomer was also right while speculating on those supposed 'organisms', in saying that: "We do not know that vital action is incompetent to develop at once heat, light, and electricity." All the 'Forces' of the scientists have their origin in the vital Principle, the One Life collectively of our Solar System that 'Life' being a portion, or rather one of the aspects, of the One Universal Life. 
You will remember that we referred to the Sun 'living' on the refuse of the 'Mother'. An explanation of this will be found in the following sentence of the Esoteric Teachings. "The Breath of the Father-Mother issues cold and radiant, and gets hot and corrupt, to cool once more and be purified in the Eternal Bosom of Inner Space." 
When a man absorbs cold pure air on a mountaintop, he exhales it impure, hot and transformed. Therefore the higher atmosphere of every globe, being its mouth as it were, and the lower part its lungs, the man of our planet breathes only the 'refuse of Mother'; therefore, "he is doomed to die thereon." 
He who would allotropize sluggish oxygen into 'ozone' to a measure of alchemical activity, reducing it to its pure essence (for which there are means), would discover thereby a substitute for an 'Elixir of Life' and prepare it for practical use. The true Occultist believes in 'Lords of Light'; he believes in a Sun, which far from being simply a 'lamp of day' moving in accordance with physical Law, and far from being merely one of those Suns, which, according to Richter, “are sunflowers of a higher light" is, like milliards of other Suns, the dwelling-place or the vehicle of a God, and a host of Gods. 
Sir Isaac Newton held to the Pythagorean corpuscular theory, and was also inclined to admit its consequences; which made the Comte de Maistre hope, at one time, that Newton would ultimately lead Science back to the recognition of the fact that the Forces and the celestial Bodies were propelled and guided by Intelligences. But the innermost thoughts and ideas of Newton were later on perverted by Science, and of his great mathematical learning only the mere physical husk was turned to account. According to one atheistic Idealist, Dr. Lewins; "When Sir Isaac, in 1687....showed mass and atom acted upon....by innate activity....he effectually disposed of Spirits, Anima, or Divinity, as supererogatory." 
Had poor Sir Isaac foreseen to what use his successors and followers would apply his 'gravity', that pious and religious man would surely have quietly eaten his apple, and never breathed a word about any mechanical ideas connected with its fall. 
With the Egyptians, the concealed God was Amen or Mon (also written as 'Ammon' or 'Amun'), the 'Hidden', the Supreme Spirit. All their Gods were dual the scientific Reality for the Sanctuary; its double, the fabulous and mythical Entity, for the masses. For instance, the Elder Horus was the Idea of the World remaining in the Demiurgic Mind, “born in Darkness before the creation of the World"; the Second Horus was the same Idea going forth from the Logos, becoming clothed with Matter and assuming an actual existence. 
Horus, the 'Elder', or Heru-Ur, is an ancient aspect of the Solar God, contemporary with Ra and Shu. Heru-Ur is often mistaken for Horus (Heru-sa-Ast), Son of Osiris and Isis. The Egyptians very often represented the rising Sun under the form of Heru-Ur or Horus the Elder, rising from a full-blown Lotus, the Universe, when the Solar Disk is always found on the hawk-head of that God. The same with Khnum (also written as 'Khnoom' or 'Khenmu'*) and Amen, both are represented as ram-headed, and both are often confused; though their functions are very different. Khnum is the 'modeller of men', fashioning men and things out of the mundane Egg, on a potter's wheel; Amen-Ra, the Generator, is the secondary aspect of the Concealed Deity. Khnum was adored at Elephanta and Philae, and his triadic Goddesses are Satet (or Sati) and Anqet (or Anuket); Amen was adored at Thebes. But it is Emepht, the One, Supreme Planetary Principle, who blows the egg out of his mouth, and who is, therefore, the same as Brahmā. The Shadow of the Deity, Kosmic and Universal, of that which broods over and permeates the Egg with its vivifying Spirit, until the Germ contained in it is ripe, was the Mystery God whose name was unpronounceable. It is Ptah, however, "he who opens", the opener of Life and Death, who proceeds from the Egg of the World to begin his dual work. Ptah was originally the God of Death, of Destruction, like Shiva. He is a Solar God only by virtue of the Sun's fire killing as well as vivifying. He was the national God of Memphis, the radiant and 'fair-faced' God. 
We have only to compare the Sun-Gods of every country to find their allegories agreeing perfectly with each other; and the more the allegorical symbol is Occult the more its corresponding symbol in exoteric systems agrees with it. Thus, if from three systems widely different from each other in appearance the old Aryan, the ancient Greek, and the modern Christian schemes several Sun-Gods and Dragons are collected at random they will be found to be copied from each other. 
Kepler, putting together the Pythagorean sentence, "the Sun, guardian of Jupiter": and the verses of David, "He placed His throne in the Sun", and "the Lord the Sun", etc., said that he understood perfect- ly how the Pythagoreans could believe that all the Globes disseminated through Space were Rational Intelligences (facultates ratiocinativa), circulating round the Sun, "in which resides a pure Spirit of Fire; the Source of the general harmony." 
The Solar 'flames' seen through a telescope are reflections says Occultism, and Robert Hunt, FRS, wrote many years ago in the 'Popular Science Review': "Whatever they (those sheets of flame) may be, it is evident they are the immediate sources of solar heat and light. Here we have a surrounding envelope of photogenic matter (this 'matter' is just like the reflection in a mirror of the flame from a photogenic lamp wick) which pendulates with mighty energies, and by communicating its motion to the ethereal medium in stellar space, produces heat and light in far distant worlds. We have said in Lecture number 1 of this Grade that those forms have been compared to certain organisms, and Herschell says, 'though it would be too daring to speak of such organisations as partaking of life (why should they not?) yet we do not know that vital action is competent to develop heat, light and electricity....can it be that there is truth in this fine thought? May the pulsing of vital matter in the central Sun of our system be the source of all that life which crowds the earth, and without doubt overspreads the other planets, to which the Sun is the mighty minister?" 
Occultism says YES to all this; and Science will discover it too at some future date. 

Mr. Hunt wrote further: “But regarding life Vital Force power far more exalted than either light, heat or electricity, and indeed capable of exerting a controlling power over them all (now this is entirely Occult Science)....we are certainly disposed to view with satisfaction that speculation which supposes the photosphere to be the primary seat of vital power, and to regard with poetic pleasure that hypothesis which refers the Solar energies to Life." 
Thus we have an important scientific corroboration for one of our fundamental teachings - namely, that (a) the Sun is the store-house of Vital Force, which is the noumenon of Electricity; and (b) that it is from its mysterious, never-to-be-fathomed depths that issue those life-currents which thrill through Space, as through organisms of every living thing on Earth. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
*Note: There is no uniform way of transliterating the names of Ancient Egyptian deities into English. We have therefore employed the most common names in general use throughout this Lecture to enable you to look these up in any good reference work, should you wish to delve more deeply into this subject. 
