SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 13. 

Dear Disciple, 

Unless the Higher Mind gravitates towards the Sun Mind, or lower Ego, or personal Self, will have the upper hand, overcome the Higher Mind, or Higher Self or Ego, for the latter is part of the Soul, and drag it down to the lower realms in the end. For the lower Mind, with its fierce selfishness, passions and animal desires will live a life of the senses only and is that human principle which is in perfect attunement with the Spirit of the Earth from which it has received its earthly body; while the Higher Mind is the Principle which comes from the Spirits of the Sun, the Solar Lhas, who added it to the body in order to 'warm' it (though this 'warming' is in actuality done by the Spark, as you know while the Higher Mind 'warms' the body with the Light of higher Intelligence and Wisdom....if it carries out its work in a masterful manner, instead of being a mere slave). 
in an During the Manvantaric Solar periods, or life, there is a regular circulation of the Vital Fluid throughout the whole of the Solar System, of which the Sun is the heart and this resembles the circulation of the blood in the human body; the Sun contracting rhythmically as the human heart does at every return of the Vital Fluid. Only, instead of performing the round in a few seconds, it takes the Solar blood ten of its years to circulate, and a whole year to pass through its auricle and ventricle before it washes the lungs, and passes thence back into the great arteries and veins of the System. 
Astronomy knows that there is a regular periodicity of approximately eleven years when the number of sunspots increases (the so-called 'Sunspot cycle'), the increase being due to the contraction of the Solar Heart. The Kosmos thus breathes, just as a man and every living creature, plant and even a mineral does upon Earth; and as our Globe itself breathes every 24 hours. 
There is no record of when sunspots were first observed, but there are Chinese records going back to 364 B.C., long prior to the 17th Century, when Galileo first saw them through his telescope (see note at end of this Lecture). 
Because of the distance of the Sun, the smaller sunspots, which are the most common, are the hardest to detect; the smallest size for practical observation being about 150 miles in diameter. Spots with diameters of 40,000 to 50,000 miles are quite common, and instances have been recorded where a number of spots were so close together that the penumbra blended into one area of nearly 7,000,000 square miles. 
(The Umbra is the dark, irregularly shaped central portion, surrounded by a lighter region known as the penumbra). Though sunspots can appear singly or in larger numbers, they usually travel in pairs, the smaller ones lasting for only a few hours or days while the large ones last for a month or more, but there has been recorded a large group of spots which lasted for nearly eighteen months. 
Sunspots confine themselves almost conclusively to the Solar latitude zones between about 8° and 30° north and south of the Solar equator. Along with the variation in number of sunspots there goes a shift in the average location of the spots too. At the beginning of a cycle the spots are located at the outer regions of the latitude zones; (i.e. approximately 30° Solar latitude). As the number increases the maximum number of spots is located in about 16o latitude, and by the end of the cycle the spots are about 8o from the Solar equator. The phenomenon is similar to the regular and healthy pulsation of the heart in an animal or human body, as the life-fluid passes through its hollow muscles. Could the human heart be made luminous, and the living, throbbing organ be made visible, so as to have it reflected upon a screen, then everyone would see the sunspot phenomena repeated there every second, due to the contraction of the heart and the rushing of the blood. 
It is encouraging to note in this connection that the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), recently stated that: “like blood pulsing in an artery, newly discovered currents of gas beat deep inside the Sun, speeding and slackening every 16 months. The solar 'heartbeat' throbs in the same region of the Sun suspected of driving the 11-year cycle of solar eruptions, during which the Sun goes from stormy to quiet and back again. Scientists are hopeful that this pulse can help them unravel the origin and operation of the solar cycle" (NASA Science News, April 2000). Having related the phenomenon to the activity of the human heart, why in the name of sense doesn't Science yet make the connection between them? 
Instead, we find Science still maintaining in its ignorance that the dark sunspots are due to all sorts of things, such as whirling masses of gas just below the surface of the photosphere, causing 'cooling of the Sun's surface' (!!) causing a relative darkening. But it admits also that: "the roots of sunspots are still a mystery." (2003). Science continues to vigorously investigate this phenomenon and has not unnaturally produced a large number of theories, the latest of which asserts that sunspots are caused by "intense magnetic activity." But activity of what it does not or cannot say. As we reprint this Lecture, we can state 
that for all its attempts Science has still failed to solve this problem to its own satisfaction and states that: "the cause or causes of these phenomena, is the subject of much speculation" (!!). The most recent of these 'speculations' is that: "a positively charged sunspot marks the point where magnetic lines of force leave the sun, while a negatively charged spot marks the point where those lines of force return to the sun" (our emphasis). So it seems that some Scientists are getting a little warmer! 
If you will read the whole of our above statements over once more very carefully you will be in the possession of the true, adequate and only explanation, and you will know more about sunspots than any astronomer or scientist living; unless he is one of our Students (which is not at all impossible! as some of the readers of this Lecture will know!!). 

Science used to hotly deny the eleven-year sunspot cycle, and it was not until fairly recently that it has admitted it grudgingly, and even proved it by means of diagrams, such as that made by Nicholson, covering the years 1880 to 1925. In the meantime the learned gentlemen flooded the scientific world with all sorts of contradictory theories, such as those of Socchi, Faye and of Young; and Professor Jevons even going so far as to attribute all the great periodical commercial crises to the influence of the sunspots. 
The ancient Egyptians knew very well the great Principle with which we opened this Lecture. In the Book of the Dead, chapter 39, Apophis or Apap is the Serpent of Evil, the symbol of human passions. The Sun (Osiris-Horus) destroys him, and Apap is thrown down, bound and chained. The God Aker, the 'Chief of the Gate of the Abyss' of Aker, the realm of the Sun (15:39), binds him. Apophis is the enemy of Ra (Light), but "the great Apap has fallen!" exclaims the Defunct. "The Scorpion has hurt thy mouth," he says to the conquered enemy (39:7). The Scorpion is the "worm that never dies" of the Christians. Apophis is bound on the Tau or Tat, the "emblem of stability." In the Ritual, the Osirian cries: "The Apophis is overthrown, their cords bind the South, North, East and West, their cords are on him. Har-ru-bah has knotted him." 
Please study this beautiful symbolism too, and you will find in it all the principles connected with the origins of the Higher Mind and the lower, and also the overcoming of the lower, which must be bound, and tamed, and overcome by the Sun-Principle of the Higher Mind. 
As the rising Sun was considered by the Egyptians to be the Soul of the Gods (how true and beautiful is this tenet) sent to manifest itself to Man every day, and as the crocodile rose out of the water at the first Sunbeam, that animal came finally to personify a Solar-devotee in India, as it personified that Fire, or the Highest Soul with the Egyptians. In the 'Anugīta' the Brahmana narrates the bliss of having crossed beyond the regions of illusion, and in his discourse occurs the following passage. "Glory, brilliance and greatness, enlightenment, victory, perfection and power these seven rays follow after this same Sun (the Higher Self). Those whose wishes are reduced (the unselfish); whose sins (passions) are burnt by penance (by overcoming these), merging the self in the self (the Higher Mind in the Soul), devote themselves to Brahman. Those people who understand the forest of knowledge (Brahman, or the Self) praise tranquillity" (Peace). 
No translator among Western Orientalists has yet perceived in the foregoing allegory anything higher than mysteries connected with sacrificial ritualism, penance, or ascetic ceremonies of Hatha Yoga. But he who understands symbolical imagery, and hears the voice of 'Self within Self", will see in this something far higher than mere ritualism, however often he may err in minor details of Philosophy. With the aid of the keys we have added to the above paragraph you will all see how the ancient teachings are coming to life again in these Lectures. By remembering these keys, and applying them to any Sacred Book you may obtain in your possession, you will be able very soon to read such writings in the correct manner. You may have noted already that your Hidden Masters make no secret of the titles of important books, some of which are used in connection with our early Lectures. We may add that this is not the usual custom among Occult Orders. Such things are reserved for their teachers only, and are often 'the great and awful secrets' of such Orders. There is no need for us to do so, for the material we have in our possession apart from such works - is so completely overwhelming that there can never be an end to our teachings and revelations, no matter how long The Order shall exist. We shall give you, in the coming Lectures, many titles of valuable Occult volumes, each of which in itself would be sufficient to build an Occult School upon in many cases....if you know how to read them and unveil their inner secrets!! 
Are there any Occult Groups or Orders in the Western Hemisphere who have this knowledge? Frankly - we do not know of any, although there are few if any - Orders of whom we do not know. There have been such, but they exist no longer, their founders having passed along, and with them their secret knowledge. By having 
built OUR Order in the manner you know from the Manifesto, we hope to have overcome such a fate as far as we are concerned. We hope that there will always be a number of worthy Students who will eventually enter not only the Inner Circle, but become members of the Supreme Council in the end. And we hope that you, who are now reading this Lecture, will be one of them. 
We have now completed the First Triangle of Grade 2, and we shall be glad to hear from you in regard to your progress with the exercises etc., and anything else you wish to write about in connection with our Studies. 
May your Higher Mind achieve full Mastery in the Light of the Sublime Wisdom. 
Your Hidden Master. 
NOTE: Science has now discovered that sunspots are not confined to our own Sun. In 1999, a group of astronomers led by Klaus G. Strassmeier of the University of Vienna, observed a sunspot group on the surface of the KO giant star XX Triangulum (HD 12545), larger than our entire Sun! This was followed in 2005 by the discovery of two bright spots on the surface of the red supergiant star Betelgeuse, located in the constellation of Orion. Since then, many more 'star-spots', as Science has dubbed these extra-Kosmic sunspots, have been discovered. 
