SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 17.  
Dear Disciple, 
Once again we must return to our studies of the Sun, after our excursions in the matter of vitamins etc. 
The Sun is not only matter it is also Spirit! Our ancestors, the 'Heathen', like their modern successors, the Parsees, were, and are, wise enough in their generation to see in it the symbol of Divinity, and at the same time to sense within, concealed by the physical symbol, the bright God of Spiritual and terrestrial Light. Such belief can be regarded as superstition only by rank Materialism (under whatever guise), which denies Deity, Spirit, Soul, and admits no intelligence outside the mind of man. But if too much wrong superstition bred by 'Churchianity' as Laurence Oliphant calls it, "renders a man a fool", too much scepticism makes him mad; sane as such individuals believe themselves to be! We prefer the charge of folly in believing too much, to that of madness which denies everything, as do Materialism and Hylo-Idealism, as it was once called. Hence the Occultists are fully prepared to receive their due from Materialism, and to meet any sort of adverse criticism. 
The unity and mutual relations of all parts of the Kosmos were known to the Ancients, before they became evident to modern Astrologers and Philosophers. For the Occultist Light is both Spirit and Matter. Behind the mode of motion, now regarded as the property of Matter and nothing more, they perceived the radiant Noumenon. It is the 'Spirit of Light', the first-born of the Eternal pure Element, whose energy, or emanation, is stored in the Sun, the great Life-Giver of the physical world, as the hidden concealed Spiritual Sun is the Light and Life-Giver of the Spiritual and Psychic Realms. 
The Sun is a great magnet. This is what some eminent modern Scientists and also Occultists believe. The Solar substance is immaterial in the sense of matter existing in states unknown to Science. The ancient Sun-Worshippers regarded the great Spirit as a nature-God, identical with nature and the Sun as the Deity in whom the Lord of Life dwells. Gama is the Sun, according to the Hindu theology, and "The Sun is the source of the souls and of all life'. Agni, the 'Divine Fire' the deity of the Hindu, is the Sun, for the fire and the Sun are the same. Ormazd is Light, the Sun-God, or the Life-Giver. In the Hindu Philosophy, "The souls issue from the Soul of the World, and return to it as sparks to the fire". 
It is also said there that "The Sun is the Soul of all things; all has proceeded out of it, and will return to it", which shows that the visible Sun is meant allegorically here, and refers to the Central, invisible Sun, God, whose first manifestation was Sephira, the emanation of En-Soph, Light, in short. And like the Pagan Saturn, who had his castle of flame in the seventh heaven, the Jewish Jehovah had his "castle of fire over the seventh heaven". None of the ancients, the Sun-Worshippers included, regarded our visible Sun otherwise than as an emblem of their metaphysical, invisible Central Sun-God. Neither did they believe what our modern Science teaches, namely, that Light and heat proceed from our Sun, and that it is this Star which imparts all life to our visible nature. 
In the Rig-Veda it is stated that: "His radiance is undecaying, the intensely-shining, all-pervading, unceasing rays of Agni desist not, neither night nor day". This relates to the Spiritual Central Sun, whose rays are all-pervading and unceasing, the eternal and boundless life-giver. HE the POINT; the Centre which is everywhere of the Circle which is nowhere; the ethereal, spiritual fire, the Soul and Spirit of the all-pervading, mysterious Aether; the despair and puzzle of the mat- erialist, who will someday find that that which causes the numberless Cosmic forces to manifest themselves in eternal correlation is but a Divine electricity, or rather galvanism, and that our Sun is but one of the myriad magnets disseminated throughout Space a reflector. 
Kepler ascribed for the constant motion and restoration of the Sun's energy and planetary motion the perpetual care of a Spirit, or Spirits. And the whole of antiquity believed this to be so. The Occultists replace the word Spirit with 'Creative Forces', which they endow with intelligence. But we may call them Spirits too. The Occultists deny the anthropomorphic God of the Monotheists, but never the Divine Principle of Nature, or the Universe. They combat Protestants and Roman Catholics on a number of dogmatic theological beliefs of human and sectarian origin. They agree with them in their belief in Spirits and intelligent operative Powers, though they do not worship the 'Angels' as the Latinists do. 
The tradition of the Dragon and the Sun is echoed in every part of the world, both in its civilised and semi-savage regions. It took rise in the whisperings about secret Initiations among the profane, and was once universally established through the formerly universal helio- latrous religion. There was a time when the four parts of the world were covered with the temples sacred to the Sun and the Dragon; but the cult is now mostly preserved in China (?) and Buddhist countries, Bel and the Dragon being uniformly coupled together, and the priest of the Ophite religion as uniformly assuming the name of his God. 
Among the religions of the past, it is in Egypt we have to seek for its Western origin. The Ophites adopted their rites from Hermes Trismegistus, and heliolatrous worship with its Sun-Gods crossed over into the Land of the Pharaohs from India. In the gods of Stonehenge we recognise the divinities of Delphi and Babylon, and in those of the latter the Devas of the Vedic nations. Bel and the Dragon, Apollo and Python, Krishna and Kāliyā, Osiris and Typhon, are all one under many names the latest of which are Michael and the red dragon, and St. George and his dragon. As, Michael is "one as God", or his "double” for terrestrial purposes, and is one of the Elohim, the fighting Angel, he is thus simply a permutation of Jehovah. Whatever the Cosmic or astronomical event that first gave rise to the allegory of the 'War in Heaven', its earthly origin has to be sought in the temples of Initiation and archaic crypts; and the proof is that we find: 

the priests assuming the name of the Gods they served; the 'Dragons' held throughout all antiquity as the symbol of Immortality and Wisdom, of secret knowledge and eternity; and 
the Hierophants of Egypt, of Babylon and India, styling themselves generally the 'Sons of the Dragon', and 'Serpents'; thus corroborating the Teachings of the Secret Philosophy. 
There were numerous catacombs in Egypt and Chaldea, some of them of very vast extent. The most renowned were the subterranean crypts of Thebes and Memphis. The former, beginning on the Western side of the Nile, extended towards the Libyan desert, and were known as the Serpent's Catacombs, or passages. It was there that the Sacred Mysteries of the Kuklos Anagkēs were performed, the 'Unavoidable Cycle', more generally known as the 'Circle of Necessity'; the inexorable doom imposed upon every soul (Higher Mind) after bodily death, when it has been judged in the region of Amenta. 
In Brasseur de Bourbourg's 'Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l'Amérique Centrale', Votan, the Mexican demi-god, in narrating his expedition, describes a subterranean passage which ran on underground and terminated at the root of the heavens, adding that this passage was a Snake's hole, "un agujero de colubra"; and that he was admitted to it because he was himself a 'Son of the Snakes', or a Serpent. The importance of this lies in the fact that his description of the 'Snake's hole' is the same as that of the Egyptian crypt, as mentioned above. The Hierophants, moreover, of Egypt, and also of Babylon, generally styled themselves during the Mysteries, the 'Sons of the Serpent-God', or 'Sons of the Dragon'. 
“The Assyrian priest always bore the name of his God", says Movers. The Druids of the Celto-Britannic regions also called themselves Snakes. "I am a Serpent, I am a Druid", they exclaimed. 
The Egyptian Karnak is twin brother of the Carnac of Brittany (Bretagne), the latter Carnac meaning "The Serpent's Mount'. The Dracontia once covered the surface of the Globe, and these temples were sacred to the Dragon, only because it was the symbol of the Sun, which, in its turn, was the symbol of the Highest God - the Phoenician Elon or Elion, whom Abraham recognised as El Elion. Besides the surname of Serpents, they had also the appellation of 'Builders' or 'Architects', for the immense grandeur of their temples and monuments was such that even now the pulverised remains of them "frighten the mathematical calculations of our modern engineer", as Taliesin says. 
Brasseur de Bourbourg hints that the chiefs of the name of Votan, the Quetzalcoatl, or Serpent deity of the Mexicans, are the descendants of Ham and Canaan. "I am Hivim", they say. "Being a Hivim, I am of the great race of the Dragon (Snake). I am a Snake myself, for I am a Hivim". 
There is Biblical evidence that two of Jacob's sons, Levi and Dan, as well as Judah, married Canaanite women and followed the worship of their wives, for the dying Jacob thus describes his sons: "Dan", says he, "shall be a Serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse-heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.... I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord!" Of Simeon and Levi, the patriarch (or Israel) remarks that they.... "are brethren; instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly". Now, in the original the words 'their secret' read; "their SOD" And Sod was the name for the great Mysteries of Baal, Adonis and Bacchus, who were all Sun-Gods and had Serpents for symbols. The Kabalists explain the allegory of the fiery serpents by saying that this was the name given to the tribe of LEVI, to all the Levites in short, and that Moses was the Chief of the Sodales. 
Psalm 25:14. reads: "The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him"; but this is a Christian mistranslation, for it ought to read: "Sod Ihoh (the mysteries of Iohoh) are for those who fear Him". 
 
"The members of the priest-colleges were called Sodales", Freund's 'Latin Lexicon', and Cicero writes: "Sodalities were cons- tituted in the Idaean Mysteries of the Mighty Mother"; (See Samuel F. Dunlap: ‘Sod: The Mysteries of Adoni', pub. Williams and Norgate, London 1861). Moses is mentioned by several old historians as an Egyptian priest, and Sigmund Freud, in his book on 'Moses and Monotheism' (Hogarth Press 1939), affirms this. Manetho says he was a Hierophant of Heliopolis (Egyptian ‘Anu', ‘On' of the Bible), and a priest of the Sun-God Osiris, and that his name was Osarsiph. Those who accept it as a fact that he was "learned in all the Wisdom" of the Egyptians, must also submit to the rigid interpretation of the word ‘wisdom', which was known throughout the world as a synonym of initiation into the sacred Mysteries of the Magi; and it may interest some of you who are also being initiated into those same Mysteries that the writer of this particular Lecture was a contemporary of Moses (although about 20 years older in age at that time) in Egypt, and was connected with these same Mysteries then and with the Royal Court to which Moses also belonged. How time flies! 
And the Pharaoh's daughter who 'saved' Moses and 'adopted him' was none other than his own mother, who, as was the custom in Egypt in those days, floated her recently born child in a wicker basket on the waters of the Nile, as an offering to the Crocodile God Sebek, who, if he did not approve of the child would drag him under and devour him. Needless to say, great care was taken that such an unhappy event never took place!! Josephus states that the name of this princess was Thermuthis; but her real name was Mutnezemt (also written Mutnodjmet). Her name means 'sweet mother' in Egyptian and so she was! If you wish to see what she looked like, her picture (the only one in existence) is to be found in 'Kings and Queens of Ancient Egypt' by Winifred Brunton, published by Hodder and Stoughton, London 1924. This is now a rather scarce and expensive book but you may be able to obtain a copy from one of the second-hand booksellers. Alternatively, you can find many of Brunton's portraits of Egyptian Kings and Queens on the Internet. We add that there is no one outside our Order who knows the inner secret of what we have just told you, and the complete story would make an astounding tale, but it must not be revealed, for occult reasons; nor are you permitted to divulge it, for it is told under the seal of secrecy to you. 
The 'War in Heaven' is shown, in one of its significations, to have referred to those terrible struggles in store for the candidate for Adeptship struggles between himself and his (by magic) personified human passions (or between the Higher and Lower Minds), when the enlightened Inner Man (the Higher Mind) had to either slay (tame or subdue) them or fail. If he succeeded he became the 'Dragon-Slayer', and a 'Son of the Serpent' and a Serpent himself, having cast off his old skin and being born in a new body, becoming a Son of Wisdom and Immortality in Eternity. 
This Lecture ends the first step, or side of the second Triangle in Grade 2, and if you have any queries we shall be glad to hear from you as usual. May you too succeed in 'Slaying the Dragon' in due time and become a Son of Wisdom. 
Your Hidden Master. 
