SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 12. 

Dear Disciple, 
Your Hidden Masters have made frequent allusions in the previous Lectures to the Ancient Teachings and the Ancient Books. In several of the Lectures of Grade 1 we have advised you to obtain some of these books if you wished to extend your studies in connection with our Teachings. But there is another volume of great beauty and importance, and that is the sacred tome known as the 'Book of Enoch' which we have mentioned once or twice already. Enoch was called "the prophet", the "second Messenger" from God to Man. He is called the prophet because he first made known to the Initiated in the Mysteries the terrible convulsions which buried Atlantis at the bottom of the sea. 
The fall of Atlantis had been foreshadowed in another work of antiquity but the prophecies contained therein were sealed up, so that the world knew them not; in the same way the Book of Enoch was in part a sealed Volume and it was not communicated to the profane. Enoch's revelation of the Divine Law, which was once the code of an immense Empire, and was known to priests and Divines throughout the then known world, disappeared at an early period of the so-called Christian era, when the Petro-Paulite Churches and their felonious priests began to destroy every book which was not in complete conformity with their religious systems (Acts 19:18-20); and has only been republished in the 19th century, but in an imperfect shape. As far as we know there is only one genuine edition of the book, also published in the 19th century by Dr. E.V. Kenealy, a man of immense learning and great sincerity, for whom we have the greatest possible respect. That edition is in harmony too with the true version of the Apocalypse, and not in unison with the structure of the sham Christianity which papal Rome and its satellites reared on the ruins of Truth. And this fact of course explains its disappearance in the original for so many centuries. 
The fate of apocryphal writings in general, says Archbishop Laurence in his dissertation on the Book of Enoch, has been singular. On one side, from the influence of theological opinion, or theological caprice, they have been sometimes injudiciously admitted into the canon of Scripture; while on the other side, from an over anxiety to preserve that canon inviolate, they have been not simply rejected, but loaded with every epithet of contempt and obloquy. The version of Enoch which was put forth by the Archbishop in 1821 is in many respects taken from an Ethiopic original that is spurious. To a critical eye, as Laurence admits, it presents the obvious appearance of having been the work of two or three different persons, living in different periods, just as the bulk of the writings which now constitute the Old Testament are at length proved to be. This fact did not escape the notice of the Archbishop: but wedded to a system of which he was one of the Praetorian guard, it did not occur to him that it was expedient to separate the true from the false, the old from the new; and he has accordingly translated the whole of what he had, treating it however as a figment by some ingenious Jew whom he supposes to have lived before the advent of Jesus. 
Why this person forged it in Aramaic and Hebrew, as it is supposed, but without any basis; how it became lost; why it should have been translated into the Abyssinian, and perhaps the Greek, and into no other known languages; how allusions have been made to it in the Zohar; and under what delusion Tertullian, in his tract on Idolatry, wrote when he spoke of it as the composition of the most ancient prophet Enoch, inspired to prophecy by the Holy Spirit, the learned Archbishop has not thought it worthy of his notice to explain; but he has, like all such writers, indulged in assertions and speculations which he would have his reader accept without any reason, as if they furnished in themselves the most convincing proofs. 
That the Book of Enoch was classed by some of the Church Fathers, as they are called, among the apocryphal tracts, demonstrates nothing. Apocryphal does not mean spurious, as the multitude is taught to believe: it means hidden (from the Greek 'apokruptein'; to hide away). That is, a book, or something else, concealed from the general laity, because it contained secrets which it was not deemed advisable that the general laity should know. 
Irenaeus in the second century, and Clemens of Alexandria, and Anatolius, Bishop of Laodicea, if their testimony be worth anything, do not speak of it as though they denied its authenticity; Tertullian in the same age quotes from it as authentic; nor does Origen, who in most matters of a theological character is worth a phalanx of those canonized imposters, throw any doubt upon the work, though he admits that it was not wholly accepted by the Churches. 
The Book is referred to and copiously quoted from in the Pistis Sophia, and it is quoted on various occasions in the 'Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs'. Perhaps St. Augustine was quite right in saying (in the 'City of God', 15:23) that the Church rejected the Book of Enoch out of her canon owing to its too great antiquity (ob nimiam antiquitatem). There was no room for the events noticed in it within the limit of the 4000 years B.C. assigned to the world from its creation!!! 
The Book of Enoch is a résumé, a compound of the main features of the history of the Third, Fourth and Fifth Races; a very few prophecies from the present age of the world; a long retrospective, introspective and prophetic summary of universal and quite historical events geological, ethnological, astronomical, and psychic 
with a touch of Theogony out of the antediluvian records. The secret and sacred Name and its potency are well and clearly, though allegorically, described in it. 
As some Students have questioned the authenticity of Kenealy's book, which they say seems to be almost entirely 'invented', bearing little or no resemblance to the 'scholarly' editions produced by Archbishop Laurence in 1883, R. H. Charles in 1917, Michael A. Knibb in 1978, and others, we will say a few more words, though quite why we should need to do so, when the answer to these Students' questions is given above, we are not entirely sure! The fact of the matter is that the book is so very old that (so far as we are aware) no complete copies of it remain. What has come down to us are the 'spurious' texts we referred to earlier, extant only in the Ge'ez dialect of Ethiopia to which later fragments have been appended in Aramaic, Greek and Latin. None of these texts are older than the 3rd or 4th centuries B.C., whereas the book itself predates them by many millennia, for it discusses the fall of Atlantis, which occurred some 11,500 years before the present era. If almost nothing of the original remained, how did Kenealy write his book? The answer, dear Student, can be summed up in two words: Divine Inspiration. For you should know that that every single book, text, writing, etc, ever conceived by the mind of man exists in a higher (or lower realm) in its complete and original form, of which the earthly manifestation is a reflection, and often a very distorted one at that. Later on, when we come to discuss Kenealy's book in greater depth, you will see just why we say it is genuine and why we value it as highly as we do, and that is all we have to say, so please do not write to us about this! 
When we remember that the early Christian Church Fathers spent their days and nights in forgery, mutilating, interpolating, or destroying every manuscript that contained aught that was repugnant to the Church's young desire of universal despotism, we understand better the Occult reference by Jesus under the symbol of "new wine in old bottles", when he alluded to the interpolation of new doctrines into old books and putting forth of modern figments under ancient names. 
"It is wonderful that no man has as yet attempted to explain the numerous mystic sayings of this Messenger: many of them deeply tinged with the symbolism of Hindostan and Pythagoras, who is supposed by some to be the Sanskrit Bud'ha Gooros, or Teacher of Wisdom", says Dr. Kenealy. He says elsewhere: "Those who examine it fairly will be convinced that it is one of the most ancient and authentic Volumes in the world; those who are too lazy, too cunning, or too sensual to do so, will go to their priests to ask them how they shall believe, and their priests, as usual, will add a new rivet to their fetters, and tell them that it is apocryphal". Bitter words; but unfortunately true! 
The reason why we have this mentioned book to you is that we shall refer to it from time to time in future; especially in the Inner Teachings, for it contains the most remarkable revelations (in a hidden manner) which it will be necessary to learn to understand; and when we refer to it again we ask you to remember just what we have told you here. If you wish to obtain a copy of it you should study it in Kenealy's version. At the time of last updating this Lecture in 2021, Kenealy's first edition of 1872 and second edition of 1893 are both extremely scarce and prohibitively expensive. Consequently we advise you to download the PDF edition of the book to be found on the Internet at www.occult-mysteries.org. This is a faithful copy of the original edition published in two parts (volumes) in 1872 and identical with it. But there is no necessity for you to obtain the book yourself, for we shall quote extensively from it in future Lectures. 

The Sanctum Sanctorum of the Ancients, also called the Adytum - the recess at the West End of the Temple, which was enclosed on three sides by blank walls and had its only aperture or door hung over with a curtain was common to all ancient nations. A great difference is now found between the secret meaning of this symbolical place as given in the Esotericism of the Pagan and in that of the later Jews, though its symbology was originally identical throughout the ancient Races and Nations. 
The Gentiles placed in the Adytum a sarcophagus, or a tomb ("Taphos') in which was the Solar God to whom the Temple was consecrated, holding it, as the Pantheists, in the greatest veneration. They regarded it, in its Esoteric meaning, as the symbol of resurrection, cosmic, solar, or individual, and human. It embraced the wide range of periodical, and (in time) punctual Manvantaras, or the re-awakenings of the Kosmos, Earth and Man to new experiences; the Sun being the most poetical and also the most grandiose symbol of such Cycles in Heaven, and man in his re-incarnations on Earth. In the same manner the 'King's Chamber' in the Great Pyramid is an Egyptian 'Holy of Holies'. 
On the days of the Mysteries of Initiation, the candidate, representing the Solar God, had to descend into the Sarcophagus, and represent the energising ray, entering into the fecund womb of Nature. Emerging from it on the following morning, he typified the resurrection of Life after the change called Death. In the Great Mysteries his figurative 'Death' lasted two days, when with the Sun he arose on the third morning, after a last night of the most cruel trials. (These 'Mysteries' are not those to which we referred before). 
In Hesiod, Zeus creates his Third Race of men out of ash-trees. In the Popol Vuh the Third Race of men is created out of the tree Tzita and the marrow of the reed called Sibac. But Sibac means 'egg' in the Mystery language of the Artufas, or Initiation caves. In a report sent in 1812 to the Cortes by Don Baptista Pino it is said: "All the Pueblos have their Artufas so the natives call subterranean rooms with only .These are a single door where they (secretly) assemble. impenetrable Temples. . . . . .and the doors are always closed to the Spaniards. . . .They adore the Sun and Moon. . . . .fire and the great Snake (the creative power), whose eggs are called Sibac." 
Here, then, are a few examples of the wide-spread worship of the Sun (and Moon) in all parts of the World and in similar ways. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
