SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 10. 

Dear Disciple, 
Many of the statements in the Purānas, the Vedas, the Upanishads and other sacred Books of the East have puzzled some of the Orientalists so much that, cutting the Gordian knot of perplexity they have declared the whole scheme of the Gods, genii, Rishis, and so forth to be mere figments of Brahmanical fancy and love of exaggeration. But to the student of Occultism these Esoteric Philosophies are pregnant with deep meaning. Let us leave the rind to the Western Sanskritists, but retain the essence of the fruit for ourselves. We are prepared to do more than that; we concede that in one sense much in these so-called 'fables' refers to astronomical allegories about constellations, asterisms, stars and planets. Yet, while the Gandharva of the Rig Veda may there be made to personify the fire of the Sun, the Gandharva Devas are entities both of physical and psychic character, while the Apsarasas (with other Rudras) are both qualities and quantities. In short, if ever completely unravelled to the laity, the Theogony of the Vedic Gods will reveal fathomless mysteries of Creation and Being. Parashara says truly: "These classes of thirty-three divinities exist age after age, and their appearance and disappearance is in the same manner as the Sun sets and rises again". 
"Over the seven rays of the lion's crown, and corresponding to their points, stand often the seven vowels of the Greek alphabet, AEHIOYQ, testifying to the seven Heavens", as stated by C.W. King, the great authority on Gnostic antiquities. And in another place he confesses that the 'Gnostic' gems are not the work of the Gnostics, but belong to pre-Christian periods, and are the work of 'magicians'. 
The above mentioned lion is the Solar Lion and the emblem of the Solar Cycle, as Garuda (who is co-eternal with Vishnu, the Maha Kalpa, or Great Life Cycle, beginning and ending with the manifesting Vishnu) is the emblem of the Sun and Solar Cycle in the Vishnu Purana. This is shown by the details of the allegory. At his birth, Garuda, on account of his 'dazzling splendour', is mistaken for Agni, the God of Fire, and, was thence called Gaganeshvara, 'Lord of the Sky'. His representation as Osiris, on the Abraxas (Gnostic) gems, and by many heads of the allegorical monsters, with the head and beak of an eagle or a hawk - both Solar birds denotes Garuda's Solar and Cyclic character. His son is Jatayu, the cycle of 60,000 years. King also states: "Whatever its primary meaning (of the gem with the Solar lion and vowels) it was probably imported in its present shape from India, that true fountain head of Gnostic iconography". The mysteries of the seven Gnostic vowels, uttered by the Thunderers of St. John, can be unriddled only by the primeval and original Occultism of Āryavārta, brought into India by the primeval Brāhmans, who had been initiated in Central Asia. 

By linking up the various sources of the Occult Teachings it is possible to arrive at a complete picture of the journeys of the Teachers from Atlantis until our own period. These Teachings have penetrated into all sacred books of all the historic times. Whence did they come? You may ask this question of any theologian, philosopher or historian, and the answer must always be if the speaker be honest "We do not know". How can they know if they have not learned it from the study of Occult Science? The Occult Doctrine of Seven Races, and seven Rounds of life and evolution around our terrestrial Chain of Spheres (see diagram accompanying Lecture number 6 of this Grade), may be found even in Revelation; see 17:10; and Leviticus 23:5 to 18; the first passage speaking of the 'Seven Kings', of whom five have gone; and the second about the 'seven Sabbaths' etc. When the seven "Thunderers' or 'Sounds', or 'Vowels' one meaning out of the seven for each such vowel relates directly to our own Earth and its Seven Root-Races in each Round "Had uttered their voices", but had forbidden the Seer to write them, and made him "seal up those things", what did the Angel, "standing upon the sea and upon the Earth", do? He lifted up his hand to heaven, and sware by Him that liveth for ever and ever 
that there should be time no longer: But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God (of the Cycle) should be finished" (Revelation 10:4-6). 
Study the above in the light of the Great Cycles of which you know, and you will see the meaning. 

The symbol Jehovah has collapsed under close analysis, and symbologists have discovered with dismay that their adopted Deity was only a mask for many other Gods, a euphemism for an extinct planet, at best the Genius of the Moon and Saturn with the Jews, of the Sun and Jupiter with early Christians; that the trinity unless they accepted the more abstract and metaphysical meanings given to it by the Gentiles was, in truth, only an astronomical triad, composed of the Sun (the Father), and the two planets Mercury (the Son) and Venus (the Holy Ghost), Sophia, the spirit of Wisdom, Love and Truth, and Lucifer, as Christ, the "bright and morning star", as he is called in Revelation. For, if the Father is the Sun (the 'Elder Brother', in the Eastern Inner Philosophy), the nearest planet to it is Mercury (Hermes, Budha, Thoth), the name of whose Mother on Earth was Maia. 
Now this planet receives seven times more light than any other; a fact which led the Gnostics to call their Christos, and the Kabalists their Hermes (in the astronomical meaning), the 'Seven-fold Light'. Finally, this God was Bel the Sun being Bel with the Gauls; Helios, with the Greeks; Baal with the Phoenicians; El, in Chaldean, hence El-ohim, Emanu-el, and El, 'God', in Hebrew. 
But even the Kabalistic God has vanished in the rabbinical workmanship, and one has now to turn to the innermost metaphysical sense of the Zohar to find in it anything like Ain Soph, the Nameless Deity and the Absolute, so authoritatively and loudly acclaimed by the Christians. But it is certainly not to be found in the Mosaic Books, at any rate by those who try to read without a key to them. Ever since this key was lost, Jews and Christians have tried their best to blend these two conceptions, but in vain. They have only succeeded in finally robbing even the Universal Deity of ITS majestic character and primitive meaning. 
In the ancient teachings we may read; "Said the Earth: 'Lord of the shining face (Sun), my house is empty send thy Sons to people this wheel (Earth). Thou hast sent thy Seven Sons to the Lord of Wisdom (Mercury or Budha). Seven times doth he see thee nearer to himself; seven times more doth he feel thee. Thou hast forbidden thy Servants, the small Rings, to catch thy Light and Heat, thy great Bounty to intercept on its passage. Send now to thy Servant the same!" The Sun, however refuses to people our Globe, as it is not ready to receive life as yet. 
Mercury, as an astrological Planet, is still more Occult and Mysterious than Venus. It is identical with the Mazdean Mithra, the Genius, or God, "established between the Sun and the Moon", the perpetual companion of the 'Sun' of Wisdom. Pausanias (Book 5), shows him as having an altar in common with Jupiter. He had wings to express his attendance upon the Sun in its course; and he was called the Nuntius and Sun-Wolf, "solaris luminis particeps" (participant in solar light). He was the leader and evocator of Souls, the great Magician and the Hierophant. Virgil depicts him as taking his wand to evoke from Orcus the souls plunged therein - "tum virgam capit, hac animas ille evocat orco". He is the Golden-coloured Mercury, whom Hierophants forbade to name. He is symbolised in Grecian Mythology by one of the ‘dogs' (vigilance), which watch over the Celestial flock (Occult Wisdom), or Hermes Anubis; or again, Agatho-daemon. He is the Argus watching over the Earth, mistaken by the latter for the Sun itself. It is through the intercession of Mercury that the Emperor Julian prayed to the Occult Sun every night; for, as Vossius says; "All the theologians assert that Mercury and the Sun are one....He was the most eloquent and the most wise of all the Gods, which is not to he wondered at, since Mercury is in such close proximity to the Wisdom and the Word of God (the Sun) that he was confused with both". 
Vossius here uttered a greater Occult Truth than he suspected. The Hermes of the Greeks is closely related to the Hindu Saramā and Sāra-maya, the Divine Watchman, "who watches over the golden flock of stars and Solar rays". We are told in the ancient teachings that our Globe is propelled around by its Planetary Lord, the Spirit of the Earth and his six Assistants, and gets all its vital forces, life and powers through the medium of the Seven Planetary Archangels from the Spirit of the Sun, directly or indirectly. These latter are the Sun's messengers of Light and Life. The First is born under the Sun; the Second under Jupiter; the Third under Mars, and also under Venus; the Fourth under Soma, the Moon, and under Saturn, the evil-eyed or the Dark; the Fifth under Mercury. It is for this reason that each man, born under one of these Planets, receives his septenate or combination of Principles, gets his specific quality from one of these Archangels. Every active power or force of the Earth comes to her from one of the Seven Lords. Light comes through the medium of Venus, who receives a triple supply, and gives one-third to the Earth. 
For this reason Venus and Earth are called 'Twin-Sisters', but the Spirit of Earth is subservient to the 'Lord' of Venus. On this account our wise men represent the two Globes, one over, the other under the double sign (the primeval Swastika bereft of its four arms, or the cross: +); for the symbol of Venus is ?, and that of Earth . 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
