Grade 2. Number 14. 
Dear Disciple, 
We have often been questioned by students upon various subjects relating to health, and in our talk today we are going to discuss nerves, glands and diet, for they are subjects that will be of interest to the majority; moreover, they form part of the studies in this grade. 
Few people nearing middle age can say they have not been plagued by 'nerves' at some period, and after all what are these nerves that play such an important part in our lives? 
Science tells us that the function of the nervous system is to adjust the individual to the world in which it lives, and to co-ordinate the working of the internal organs so that they maintain the integrity of the body. It is also the specific apparatus of all conscious experience and is the principal mechanism for the regulation of the conduct and maintenance of unity in the personality. In carrying out these functions, nervous excitations travel along the nerve fibres in waves of relatively high speed (120 metres per second). 
When a person says he is suffering from 'nerves', he implies that there is something wrong with his nervous system, but this is not so. When a nerve is damaged there is either intense pain, paralysis, loss of sensation or other function. When suffering from a 'nervous breakdown' a person may complain of pains in the head, stomach, sleeplessness, loss of appetite, palpitation, trembling and fears, and yet have nothing whatsoever wrong with his actual nerves. We must, therefore look for the cause of this in the nature of the excitations or messages sent along the nerves. 
You will remember Science has told us that the nerves are the principal mechanism for the maintenance of unity in the personality and this brings us to the root of the whole trouble 'nerves' are a personality disorder and not a breakdown of the nervous system. We must go behind the idea of 'nerves' till we come to 'ideas', and ideas are entirely personal property to control as we will. 
The effect of the Mind upon the body can be profound enough, as we shall see, to account for all kinds of functional disorders. Very seldom does a disturbance of mind fail to affect adversely the physical body in some way, and it is almost useless to treat functional troubles until the mind has found PEACE. Mental disturbances act somewhat in the nature of a boomerang, they upset the body and then the body re-acts upon the mind again - until the mind calls a halt!! 
Life drives hard in these days and it is essential that we attain mental control so that we are ready for all emergencies. Such trifles as the loss of a little money, a small failure or an idle word of personal disparagement should not cause any of us a depressing day, followed perhaps by lack of sleep and energy and resultant irritability. If you find yourself inclined to be over sensitive in this way, step outside of yourself and review the situation as an onlooker and examine things from the point of view of eternity and you will then note how trivial it all is certainly not worth losing any sleep over. 

When your body is in good health it works so smoothly that you are not conscious of it; it should be the same with your mind. The moment you are plagued by fears, anxieties, depressions, anger and sensitiveness you can be quite sure that you are looking at life in a wrong manner. Your problems should be a matter of interest, something for you to conquer, and not cause for hopeless anxiety. 
There are many predisposing factors that unfortunately are common to us all, one of which is known as the Association of Ideas. A trivial event happens and the mind immediately connects it up with some incident that happened in the past and an overwhelming emotion is stirred up that has neither rhyme nor reason in it. This mis- representation of events has the power to cause us a great deal of trouble and should be vigorously avoided. The meaning of our experiences must be sought in the realities of today instead of in the memories of the past, and one must bear in mind the fact that we are marching forwards and not backwards, for a great deal more depends upon where we are going than where we have come from. Lack of balance is another fault and we are inclined to drift about on the tide of our likes and dislikes. It is not uncommon to hear the remark "I would never believe a word he says, because I don't like him”, the person who feels like that is equally gullible with the folk he does happen to like, which is ridiculous. 
A great many people put the whole blame for 'nerves' upon their environment and they try to make that environment adapt itself to their needs, whereby failing to discern that life requires us to be adaptable. 
There is a purpose behind everything, and the only way to work clear of a particular environment is by getting a better understanding of the service that can be rendered to those you have attracted towards you in that environment. Our nature is so constituted that its powers have freedom of expression only when the ulterior motive of self is absent. 
Life is a spiritual experience and we ought not to find it difficult to take the rough with the smooth, neither worrying too much about our failures nor being too elated with our successes. When we fail to grasp the real meaning of life, we stand in danger of nervous break- downs, uncontrollable fears, loneliness, apathy and disillusionment, for nervous disorders are outward and visible signs of inward warfare, and if life seems to have failed to fulfil expectations the evolution of the Soul can in no way be measured by worldly success. Unfortunately, early training as children has taught most of us to look for worldly success and it is difficult to supplant that word 'success' with 'service'. It may not be pleasant to accept the idea that we alone are responsible for our 'nerves' but the idea does at least offer us the hope of getting rid of these troubles if we honestly set about it. 
Of course there is such a thing as leading too active a life and the results of this are felt, often very severely, between the ages 50 - 60. At this period when a little reserve strength would be useful, there is none left, with the result that ill-health is experienced. Middle age calls for a gradual slowing down of physical activity, which energetic people find irksome, and in trying to rush around as usual they precipitate a general breakdown. In order to emerge from this situation an entirely new mental concept of how best to lead a useful life without so much bodily exertion has to be arrived at. If this end is achieved, the enforced rest, careful dieting and new mental stimulus will often put them right again and they are able to proceed (at a slower pace) towards a ripe old age. Old age, however, is looked upon by many as almost a disease, and modern conditions certainly tend to make it pathological. 
Age is an entirely relative condition and many statesmen, philosophers and artists have been in their prime at 70. At every age there is a normal constitution which best befits the individual for certain kinds of work. The final stage, under ideal conditions, should certainly be no less agreeable than infancy or adolescence. Physical needs become less, and the gradual loosening of ties make the passing over an experience without fear or pain, in fact something far easier than that of birth when the issues at stake are enormous, and nature's handicraft is put to a terrific test. Have you ever realised that at the moment you were born the whole course of your circulation altered, that it was no longer oxygenated and supplied with nourishment; that every untried organ had to set to work on its own account; that your lungs had to separate oxygen from the air and pass it out all with your first cry! This surely was an ordeal, but one that you did naturally before you had learned to worry! 

We have stated that the Mind is responsible for the nervous System, and we shall now see how many functional disorders can be brought about by the mind working through the nervous system which is in control of the glands of the human body, especially the ductless or endocrine glands. The activities of the ductless glands are concerned with growth and nutrition, with the development and differentiation of tissue and ultimately with the mental equipment of the individual. If we ask Science how this differentiation takes place, and how energy, supplied by food, is translated into the contraction of a muscle or the production of a thought we shall knock at the gate of mystery in vain. It is only known that the various organs and tissues of the body are guided by the nervous system and the internal secretions of the ductless glands. The connection of these glands with the nervous system is altogether unique, in fact they are an integral part of that system and they have the power of instantaneous reaction to emotional stimuli. They are immediately concerned with the blood circulation and even with its chemical contents. Anger and excitement stimulate a rapid outpouring of their secretion and this, reacting on the liver causes an immediate increase in the sugar content of the blood. Fear on the -the energy other hand disturbs these glands in the opposite direction is reduced with resulting pallor and cold perspiration. Any lowering of their activity leads to weakness and premature fatigue, to circulatory disturbances which are capable of producing various forms of indigestion and insomnia combined with, mental and emotional irritability which, has often been put down as 'neurasthenia'. Here we have a full description of how the boomerang works!! 

It is not necessary to discuss all of these glands separately, there are many interesting books on the subject available, but a survey of one or two of them will perhaps help us to grasp the necessity of concentrating on PEACE, with the subsequent control of the emotions, for we set our own handicap in life by the use we make of these emotions. This theme will be developed in our next lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
