SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 24. 
Dear Disciple, 
Although the scientists as a whole may ridicule the doctrine of the Seven Planetary Spirits, yet the need of intelligent ruling and guiding Forces is increasingly realised by some of the really eminent men of Science, in spite of the fact that they will have nothing to do with Occult Teachings or with the ancient systems of religious and scientific philosophy; thus some of them have generated in their own, inner consciousness, a kind of semi-mystical system. That this is so may be apprehended when we refer back for a moment to two scientists of the 19th century; namely Metcalfe and Zaliwsky. The first evolved a 'Sun-force' theory - now dropped as far as we know and the latter made of the Sun a storehouse of Electricity as the Universal Force. These are in reality revivals of the Kabalistic Teachings. Zaliwsky tried to prove that Electricity, producing "the most powerful, calorific and luminous effects," was present in the physical constitution of the Sun and explained its peculiarities. Of course, this comes very near to the Occult Teachings. 

It is only by admitting the gaseous nature of the Sun-reflector, and the powerful magnetism and Electricity of the Solar attraction and repulsion that one can explain (1), the evident absence of any waste of power and luminosity in the Sun inexplicable by the ordinary laws of combustion, no matter how many inaccurate and cranky theories Science may invent from time to time, proving (?) that the Sun is 'losing' heat etc., at such a rate that it will burn out in so many millions of years hence when there will be nobody left to check up on them at any rate, therefore quite safe as far as these scientific 'clairvoyants' are concerned - and (2), the behaviour of the Planets, so often contradicting every accepted rule of weight and gravity. Furthermore, Zaliwsky makes this Solar Electricity "differ from anything known on Earth." 

Father Secchi may be suspected of having sought to introduce "Forces of quite a new order and quite foreign to gravitation, which he had discovered in Space" (Zaliwsky, La gravitation par l'électricité, pp7, quoted in de Mirville, Des Esprits, IV, 157) in order to reconcile Astronomy with theological Astronomy. But Nagry, a member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, was no cleric, and yet he developed a theory on the necessity of intelligent Forces whose complacency "would lend itself to all the whims of the comets". He suspected that: "Notwithstanding all the actual researches on the rapidity of Light that dazzling product of an unknown Force.... which we see too frequently to understand that light is motionless in reality." 

C. E. Love, the once famous railway builder and engineer in France, tired of blind forces, made all the (then) "imponderable agents" now called "forces" subordinate to Electricity, and he declared the latter to be an "Intelligence albeit molecular in nature and material.” In this author's opinion these Forces are atomistic agents, endowed with intelligence, spontaneous will, and motion, and he thus, like the Kabalists, makes the causal forces substantial, while the forces that act on this Plane are only the effects of the former, as with him matter is eternal, and the Gods also; so is-he says-the soul (Higher Mind) also, though it is part of the still higher Spirit (Soul), both pre-existent, endowed with memory, and superior to Electric Force. The latter is subservient to the Higher Souls, he continues, those superior Souls forcing it to act according to the eternal laws (under direction). (The bracketed parts are ours; The Order.). Although the concept is somewhat hazy, it is worked out on Occult lines to a certain extent, and this system of C. E. Love is entirely pantheistic, in spite of it forming part of a scientific work. 

Though monotheists and Roman Catholics would not agree to this concept, one who believes in and knows - the great Laws connected with the Planetary Spirits, and endows nature with living Intelligences, must expect, but not resent, this opposition. We only quote instances such as the above to show that the really thinking (and not dogmatic, stultified, categorical, magisterial, oracular and dictatorial) Scientists are far from satisfied with the cul-de-sac in which Science as a whole is trapped when it finds itself unable to probe the real mysteries of Nature to their profoundest depths, both material and spiritual: because it denies the latter potency. 
Hermes declares: "And the Heaven was visible in Seven Circles and the Planets appeared with all their signs, in star-form, and the Stars were divided and numbered with the Rulers that were in them, and their revolving course, through the agency of the Divine Spirit." In this case Spirit denotes Pneuma, collective Deity, manifested in its 'Builders', or as the Church has it, "the Seven Spirits of the Presence", the Mediantibus Angelis (mediating spirits), of whom Thomas Aquinas says that "God never works but through them." 
The Sabaeans having worshipped in the graven images only the Celestial Host - angels and gods whose habitations were the Planets, never in truth worshipped the Stars. For on Plato's authority, we know that among the stars and constellations, the planets alone had a right to the title 'theoi' (Gods), as that name was derived from the verb 'to run', or 'to circulate'. 
Seldenus also tells us that they were likewise called: 'God- Councillors, and 'lictors', as they (the planets) were present at the Sun's consistory." 
The learned Kircher says: "The sceptres the seven presiding angels were armed with, explain these names of Rhabdophores and lictors given them." Reduced to its simplest expression and popular meaning, this is of course fetish worship. Yet Esoteric Astrolatry was not at all the worship of idols, since under the names of 'Councillors' and 'Lictors', present at the Sun's consistory, it was not the Planets in their material bodies that were meant, but their Regents or 'Souls' (Spirits). 
If the prayer 'Our Father in Heaven', or 'Saint' so-and-so in Heaven is not an idolatrous invocation, then 'Our Father in Mercury', or 'Our Lady in Venus', 'Queen of Heaven', etc., are not more so; for they are precisely the same thing, the name making no difference in the act. The words used in the Christian prayers 'in Heaven' cannot mean anything abstract. A dwelling whether of Gods, Angels or Saints (every one of them being anthropomorphic individualities and beings) — must necessarily mean a locality, some definite spot in that 'heaven'; hence it is quite immaterial for purposes of worship whether that spot be considered 'Heaven' in general, meaning nowhere in particular, or in the Sun, Moon or Jupiter or anywhere else. 
The Egyptian word 'Pharaoh', the title of the great Rulers of Egypt, meant, 'Son of the Sun', or 'Mouth of the Sun' (Phi-Ra); in other words, an Incarnation, which was a name blasphemously given to him by corrupt priests, who knew indeed what an 'Incarnation' meant, but did not hesitate to give it to their sovereign, however corrupt or vicious he may have been. But ‘Pharaoh' originally meant ‘Messiah', for it was Phi-Ra, or Phi-Re, meaning Son of the Sun, or Mouth of the Sun: both of the titles applicable to the incarnation of the Holy Spirit; neither of them to kings like those. 
Wilkinson was puzzled by this title, and Bryant came near to it when he conjectured that it was Phi-ourah, Vox Hori, the voice of Horus, their Messiah, adding that it was nothing unusual among the Ancients (he should have said: subservient priests) to call the words of the Prince the Voice of God. Modern Egyptologists translate the word 'Pharaoh' as 'Great House' (Per-Aa), which is quite wrong, unless we take this to be a synonym for the Sun, which is truly the 'Great House' so far as our Kosmos is concerned. Rameses, another Egyptian title, has the same meaning: 'Son of the Sun', or literally 'Born of (or through) the Sun (Ra-mes-s). As Phi, or Ph, was scarcely regarded to be a letter, it happens that Re in the old Egyptian meant the Sun; the same word in the old Irish meant the Moon. It is a primitive radical, and was applied by the olden peoples to both the luminaries, by which they indicated that they were really One parts of the Infinite. So 'Bel' in many languages meant All-God, or the Sun. 
God himself, in the Sun and Moon, has apparently given to all mankind emblematic evidence of Two Powers, but one so wholly dependent upon the other that it subsides into insignificance before it. The Sun is indeed the great creating, generating and animating Principle, while the Moon, though in her own way beautiful and useful, derives all the lustre and excellence she possesses from the Sun alone. It is in him she is clothed; it is his glorious light that she reflects. Of herself she can do little; and if the Sun were removed from the spheres the Moon would be dark and all unseen, and the whole order of existence would perish. From observing this, the Ancients no doubt symbolised God by the Sun, and the Holy Spirit of Heaven by the Moon. 
And in this symbolism, as well as in the attributes of the Sun and Moon, you will now be able to see the likeness of the Soul and Higher Mind. For without the Soul the Higher Mind is helpless and perishes; without the golden light it sheds upon that Higher Mind it would be in utter darkness, and therefore lost!! You will also realise that unless the TWO become ONE once more, each will be drawn inevitably to its own sphere at the end of each great Manvantara; and for the Higher Mind there will be another period of almost endless duration, during which it will have to wait for another DAY (if it has not descended to the lowest depths already) before it can have another chance to achieve the Divine union with the Soul, after which it will depart with it to the Golden Fourth Realm - for all Eternity, if it so desires. 
Petros was the name of the Sun; it was a word of Egyptian origin, derived from Peter (Ptr) meaning to 'open', the same as Han, the Ianus of the Ancient Greeks. We now see why the Initiated priests of the Roman Church, who were well acquainted with all these secret mystic names (and this is the reason why we are explaining them to you), made the Ninth Messenger change the name of Simon Cephas into Peter; it was to signify that their first bishop was L'Apis, the Sun himself (Sol-Ipse), the Divine Rock on which all Truth was founded and the Opener or revealer of it. 
The Sun in Aquarius was represented by the ancient Etruscans as seated on a throne of twelve altars; thus they signified that he was the Twelfth Messenger. He is the Canobus (or Canopus, Greek Kanôpos) of the Egyptian Zodiac; he was called by that people Maon or Mon, which is a Solar title like Lucumon and Menu. Ganymedes is said to have been the original of Aquarius, the Giant from the trampling of whose feet Oceanus came forth. The Book of Enoch refers to: "Twelve Gates that open to the circuits of the Sun-chariot; and from which the rays of the Sun are emitted"; this is a direct reference to the Sun in Aquarius. 
We must now leave the Sun for awhile for other studies; but we trust that the reading of the various Laws, principles, mythology, religious symbolism, its material aspects and secret properties, all connected with both Sun and Moon, have given you a deeper insight into the great Mysteries of Nature and Being, thus preparing you gradually for the Higher Teachings, when the Outer Grades are passed. 
We will end our present studies of the Sun with the beautiful Egyptian prayer found in the papyrus of Papheronmes at Berlin, and the stela as rendered by Mariette Bey in 'Mémoire sur la mère d'Apis': 
"Glory to thee, O Sun, divine child.... thy rays carry life to the pure and to those ready.... 
The Gods (the 'Sons of God', the Initiated Ones) who approach thee tremble with delight and awe.... 
Thou art the first born, the Son of God, the Word." 
May you thus reach the Fourth Divine Realm by way of the Path to the Sun. 
Your Hidden Master. 
