SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 26. 

Dear Disciple, 

At the end of the previous Lecture we advised you to remember your usual prayer for guidance and protection before commencing your experiment. Although it is well said that "the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there shall no torment touch them" (Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 3:1), and that "the guardian angel is still on active duty," as R. Carton has it, it is just as well to take nothing for granted at any time; for though the two above quotations are perfectly correct, it is up to us to show our appreciation of this holy protection by means of prayer first and thanks afterwards. George MacDonald says: "Life is measured by intensity, not by dial, dropping sand or watch," and the practise of our various exercises, meditations and so forth, intensifies our existence to such an extent that we become entirely new beings; the 'new man' is born and stands upon the hill-top surrounded by glory, beholding Life as no mere dweller in the material and earthly valleys can imagine it. He that sets a great example is great, and what greater example can there be for a sincere and true human being than to point the way to the Spirit by the spiritual example of pure, true and clean conduct, physically and mentally? This, then, is our aim as students of Occult Science: to reach complete purity of thinking and acting by way of the Path of Peace. 
The power of thought and imagination upon our physical condition alone, even after we arrive at maturity, is evinced in many ways. Fear often kills; and grief has such a power over the subtle fluids of the body as not only to derange the internal organs, but even to turn the hair white. 
Marsilius Ficinus mentions with regard to the effect of the mother's imagination upon unborn children the signature of the foetus with the marks of cherries and various fruits, colours, hairs, etc., and acknowledges that this same imagination of the mother to be may transform it into the resemblance of an ape, pig, dog or any other animal. Marcus Damascenus tells of a girl covered with hair and furnished with a full beard; Gulielmus Paradinus, of a child whose skin and nails resembled those of a bear; Baldinus Ronsaeus of one born with a turkey's wattles; Pareus, of one with a head like a frog; and Avicenna, of chickens with hawk's heads; showing that fear can arouse the imagination of animals too and stamp the lower mind of the unborn young with its impress, even if that impress be caused by fear which is nevertheless something that sets in action the alone Higher Mind in the case of human beings and the lower mind with all its instincts, etc., of an animal. 

Physiologists differ with one another in respect of the possibility of the mother's imagination influencing the body or mind of a child, and some divide the history of this subject into the fabulous, the pos- itive and the scientific. But it seems a little like hardihood in any teratologist, however great his achievements in anatomy, histology and embryology, to take so dangerous a position as that the mother has no influence on her offspring. If we grant that monstrosities are the result of arrested development nay, if we go further, and concede that the foetal future may be prognosticated from the Vitelline tracings, where will the teratologists take us to learn the antecedent cause of either? We could quote many examples of birthmarks and such, the result of a fright the mother had, and no doubt you will know of some yourself; but there is no space to go into all that in these Lectures. 
We only mention these few instances quoted above in order to remind you that imagination can produce physical effects, as some scientists have now confirmed. As recently as 2002, Mulder et al, of the University Medical Centre, Utrecht, stated: "Maternal psychological factors may significantly contribute to pregnancy complications and unfavourable development of the (unborn) child." In 2007 researchers at the University of Berkeley, in California, concluded that "...maternal stress may include increased risks of certain birth defects." Stress in this sense being simply another word for fear in one form or another. 
What scientist has ever been able to penetrate the secret of the formation of a body, or the generation of a single atom? Who has sounded to the bottom the abyss in a grain of sand? And if they are so fatally ignorant of the genesis and hidden nature of a grain of sand, how can they have an intuition, or how can they imagine the truth of the generation of a single living being? Tyndall was honest, at any rate, when he said that: "The first marshalling of the atoms, on which all subsequent action depends, baffles a keener power than that of the microscope.... the most highly trained intellect (here is the key in that last word), the most refined and disciplined imagination (and in that he fails, for the true discipline and force of imagination is unknown to ordinary science), retires in bewilderment from the contemplation of the problem." But you if you have truly studied and pondered upon the various principles and laws we have given you thus far, although this Lecture completes but the first half of our Outer Grades - know already a thousand times more on the subject of these mysteries than the most highly trained and intellectual material scientist! The atom of the chemist, the atom of the physicist, that of the metaphysician and that of the mathematician have absolutely nothing in common but the name! Moreover, there is not even complete agreement even in one and the same Science as to the properties of the atom. Each constructs an atom to suit his own fancy, in order to explain some special phenomenon with which he is particularly concerned. We gave an example of this in Lecture number 15 of Grade 1 when we mentioned the 'electron cloud model' that has displaced the earlier Atomic model of Niels Bohr and others among most modern physicists. 
The "pre-requisite of that incessant play of 'scientific imagination'," which is so often found in Professor Tyndall's eloquent discourses, is vivid indeed, as is shown by Stallo, and for contradictory variety it leaves far behind it any 'fantasies of Occultism'. 
As Cicero has remarked: "Time destroys the speculations of man, but it confirms the judgement of Nature;" just so: we do not indulge in scientific material imagination, but in the eternal laws and principles of Nature. There lies our Road to Truth and real Enlightenment. 
To imagine a thing is to firmly create a model of what you desire, perfect in all its details. The Will is then brought into action, and the form is thereby transferred to the objective world. This is creation by what is called 'Kriya-Shakti', or the creation of forms by means of thought and imagination; hence the power — divine or human - to manifest. It has been described correctly as "The mysterious power of thought which enables it to produce eternal, perceptible, phenomenal results by its own inherent energy." It is also the out-going or self-sacrificing powers of the Self or the Ego. Destroy imagination, and the condition of man will become as stationary as that of the brutes. 
Washington Irving said truly: "It is the divine attribute of the imagination, that it is irrepressible, unconfinable; that when the real world is shut out, it can create a world for itself, and with a necroman- tic power can conjure up glorious shapes and forms, and brilliant visions to make solitude populous and irradiate the gloom of a dungeon." 
Bacon divided imagination into three kinds: "joined with belief of that which is to come; joined with memory of that which is past; and of present things." 
Lord John Russell considered that: "Imagination is that faculty which arouses the passions by the impression of exterior objects; it is influenced by these objects, and consequently it is in affinity with them; it is contagious; its fear of courage flies from imagination to imagin- ation; the same in love, hate, joy, grief; hence I conclude it to be a most subtle atmosphere." 
Juvenal called it: "What I fancy, but can ne'er express." 
And finally here are four lines from Byron: 
"The beings of the mind are not of clay; Essentially mortal, they create 
And multiply in us a brighter ray 
And more beloved existence." 
Here the poet's imagination expresses nearly all in a few words. 
Imagination is not only closely allied to Magic, but it is magic of the highest kind; White Magic - if directed into the right channels of goodness, elevation, divine and right thinking. It is for this reason that we have placed the subject of Imagination in this part of our Lectures, for it leads us right into a preliminary discussion on Magic, which is one of the Principles we must consider shortly in this Grade. 
White Magic is used solely for the furtherance of the Divine Purpose, in contradistinction to Black Magic or Sorcery. Black Magic is the evil result, obtained in any shape or way, through the practise of Occult Arts; hence it has to be judged by its effects. We have nothing whatsoever to do with this latter kind of Magic; but only with the White. 
Magic is as old as man. In the oldest documents, such as the Vedas and older laws of Manu, we find many magical rites practised and permitted by the Brahmans. Tibet, Japan and China teach in the present age that which was taught by the oldest Chaldeans. The clergy of these respective countries prove moreover what they teach, namely: that the practise of moral and physical purity, and of certain austerities, develops the vital-soul power of self-illumination; in other words: they teach that it is only by pure living (see previous discussions on this subject) that the Higher Mind can receive illumination from the Soul which is all purity and wisdom, and therefore unreachable by persons whose Higher Minds are controlled by the lower, or by their material surroundings and influences, affording to Man the control over his Higher Mind, it gives him truly magical powers over the elementary spirits inferior to himself. 
In the West we find Magic of as great antiquity as in the East. The Druids of Great Britain practised it in the silent crypts of their deep caves and subterranean galleries; and Pliny devotes many a chapter to the 'wisdom' of the leaders of the Celts. The Semothees, the Druids of the Gauls, expounded the physical as well as the spiritual Sciences. They taught the secrets of the Universe, the harmonious progress of the heavenly bodies, the formation of the Earth, and above all immortality of the Soul. Pomponius Mela ascribes to them the knowledge of the highest sciences. Into their sacred groves - natural academies built by the hand of the invisible Architect assembled at the still hour of midnight to learn what man once was, and what he will be (Caesar, 3:14). They needed no artificial illumination, nor life-drawing gas or dangerous material electricity to light up their temples; for the chaste goddess of night beamed her most silver rays on their oak-crowned heads; and their white-robed sacred bards knew how to converse with the solitary queen of the starry vault (Pliny, 30). 
On the dead soil of the bygone past stand their sacred oaks (symbols of life and strength), now dried up and stripped of their spiritual meaning by the venomous breath of Materialism. But for the Student of Occult Learning their vegetation is still as luxurious and as full of deep and sacred truths, as at that hour when the Arch-Druid performed his magical cures, and waving the branch of mistletoe, severed with his golden sickle the green bough from its mother oak-tree. 
Magic is as old as Man. 
It is as impossible to name the time when Magic sprang into existence as to indicate on what day the first man himself was born. Whenever a writer has started with the idea of connecting its first foundation in a country with some historical character, further research has proved his views groundless. Odin, the Scandinavian Priest and Monarch, was thought by many to have originated the practise of Magic some seventy years B.C. But it was easily demonstrated that the mysterious rites of the priestesses called Voilers and Valas, were greatly anterior to his age, as Munter says in his work on the most ancient religions of the North before the time of Odin. Some modern authors were bent on proving that Zoroaster was the founder of Magic, because he was the founder of the Magian religion. Ammianus Marcellinus, Arnobius, Pliny and other ancient historians demonstrated conclusively that he was but a reformer of Magic as practised by the Chaldeans and Egyptians. 
Magic was considered a Divine Science which led to a participation in the attributes of Divinity itself. Philo Judæus states that "It unveils the operations of Nature, and leads to the contemplation of celestial powers." In later periods its abuse and degeneration into sorcery made it an object of general abhorrence; and rightly so. We must therefore deal with it only as it was in the remote past, during those ages when every true religion was based on a knowledge of the Occult Powers of Nature. It was not the sacerdotal class in ancient Persia that established Magic, as is commonly thought, but the Magi, who derive their name from it. The Mobeds, priests of the Parsees the ancient Ghebers are named, even at the present day, 'Magoi' in the dialect of the Pehlvi. Magic appeared in the world with the earlier races of Man. Cassien mentions a treatise, well known in the fourth and fifth centuries, which was accredited to Ham, the son of Noah, who in his turn was reputed to have received it from Jared, the fourth generation from Seth, the son of Adam. We know that Moses was a great magician, and the Egyptian Queen Mut-em-ua, the mother of Queen Mutnezemt, who was the mother of Moses, was an initiate herself, and the Jews owe to her the possession of their Prophet, "learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians (and an Egyptian himself), and mighty in words and deeds," as you can read in the Acts of the Apostles, 7:22. 

Justin Martyr, giving as his authority Trogus Pompeius, shows Joseph as having acquired a great knowledge of the magical arts with the high priests in Egypt. We shall develop this theme further in our next Lecture. 
This Lecture is another step forward and completes the second triangle of the Sacred Pyramid in Grade 2. 
We shall now be glad to have your reports on the exercises in this Grade. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
