Dear Disciple, 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 23. 

In Grade 1 we told you that an atom, a Kosmos, or a Universe is egg-shaped. In the centre of a Universe we find what is called the 'Cosmic Seed'; that which the German mathematician and philosopher Leibnitz called the 'Monad'. It is a mathematical Point and it contains the whole Universe within it, just as an oak is contained within an acorn, or a plant within a seed. In Occult phraseology it is called the first bubble on the surface of boundless homogeneous Substance, or Space (as far as the 'Space' of that particular Universe is concerned); it is the bubble of differentiation in its incipient stage. It is the beginning of the Orphic, Auric Egg; also called Brahma's Egg by the Hindus. In Astrology and Astronomy it corresponds to the Sun. On the Earthly Plane it corresponds with the terrestrial Embryo, which contains within it the future man with all his potentialities. Within the series of Principles of the human system it is the Spark of Life; just as in the physical Solar System the Sun is that Spark. The Life-Fluid of a Universe issues forth from the Central Point, and in our Solar System it exudes from the visible Sun, who reflects it all around him into the Kosmos and to its inhabitants; planetary, human and so on. This 'Life-Fluid' is called Akasha on the higher planes; on the Plane of Matter it is called Prana; in reality it is the Universal Life-Principle. In the Kosmos it proceeds from the ten 'Divinities'; the ten numbers of the Sun (10), which is itself the 'Perfect Number', since it contains all the Principles of Being; positive (1) and negative (0), or male and female. These are called DIS (in reality Space), and the Forces spread in Space, and three of them are contained in the Sun's Spark, or inmost Principle, while seven Rays are shot out by the Sun. This Life-Fluid proceeds, taking its source in the universal ONE LIFE; also from the heart of man, and from his Soul and Higher Mind, over which the Seven Rays, or Gods, preside. 
The Ether of Space fills the whole of the 'Egg' of the Universe on the Higher Plane of Being; but in its external aspect it is the plastic Crust which is supposed to develop the Sun. On the Higher Plane it is the Third Differentiation of evolving Substance: the eternal primordial Substance, or God manifested as the Creator on the Seven Planes of the Kosmos, This substance has a twofold existence; those of homogeneity and heterogeneity. As long as it is homogeneous (primordial) there is no manifestation, no phenomenon; all is hushed in sleep within the Great Mother's Being. The beginning of disturbance (manifestation or Creation) within it starts heterogeneity or evolution; it is then God viewed objectively. This plastic envelope may be compared with the Amnion, the membrane containing the Amniotic fluid which encloses the embryo, and which fluid protects it against desiccation and equalises mechanical stresses. It is common to reptiles, birds and mammals, and a superficially similar structure is found in some insects. After the birth of man it becomes the third layer is called of his magneto-vital aura. 

The Ether of Space corresponds mystically to the manifested Intellect or Soul of the World; it is then called Mahat. In man it is called Manas, or the Higher Mind in our terminology; therefore it forms part of the Soul too of which the Higher Mind is the negative aspect, while the Soul is positive. 
The sidereal contents of the Ether, or the substantial part of it entirely unknown to Science, are called Elementals in the Occult and Kabalistic Mysteries. In physical Astronomy they are known as meteors, comets, and all kinds of casual and phenomenal bodies. In the physical man they are represented by his passions and emotions; the moral comets and meteors of human nature. The 'Elementals' in a grown man are the feeders of that principle which is called Kāma in Sanskrit (not Kārma!); it is the Fourth and highest Principle of material man in the four lowest Divine Planes. It is the life manifesting in the astral body and conditioned by it, and is characterised by the attribute of feeling, whether in the rudimentary form of sensation, or in the complex form of emotion; or in any of the grades that lie between. 
The Life Currents in Ether have their origin in the Sun: they are the channels through which the vital principle of that Ether (the blood of the Cosmic Body) pass to nourish everything on Earth and on the other planets; from the minerals, which are thus made to grow and become specialised, from the plants, which are thus fed, to animal and man, to whom life is thus imparted. 
From the Kosmic Seed radiates a double radiation, psychic and physical; it expands through the whole Universe, as well as through every Solar System and on every planet. In Occultism it is called the upper Divine, and the lower material, Astral Light. 
Finally there is the outer crust of every sidereal body, the Shell of the Universal Egg, or the Sphere of our Solar System, of our Earth, and of every man or animal. In sidereal Space it is Ether proper; on the terrestrial Plane it is Air, which is built in seven layers like all else. It manifests as the primordial world-stuff which has become the permanent globe or globes for the duration of the Manvantaric Period. 
In the foregoing you find the seven contents of the Universe, compared with some of the Principles of Man. To sum up, they are: 
1. The mathematical Point. 
2. The Life-Fluid. 
3. The Ether of Space 
the Soul of the Universe. 
4. The sidereal contents of Ether. 
5. Life currents in Ether. 
6. The Astral Light. 
7. Ether proper; or the shell of the Universe. 
To its own Solar System each Sun is the Fourth Realm of Consciousness wherein human evolution reaches the Divine; for while there is still duality on that Plane, there is no separation, decay or death there. 
Yet, as you know, that Sun is but a reflection and vehicle of the true Sun, which is pure Spirit, invisible on this Plane. All the great Forces, called Fohatic Forces, are in this reflection. Virgil calls it: 
"Hail, true son of Jove, glory added to the Gods". 
Orpheus seeks, in the kingdom of Pluto, Eurydice, his lost Soul. Here we have an allegory of the Soul coming to the rescue of the Higher Mind, imprisoned or lost in the material, Earthly kingdom. 
Krishna goes down into the infernal regions and rescues therefrom his six brothers, he being the seventh Principle; a transparent allegory of his becoming a "perfect Initiate", the whole of the six principles merging into the Seventh, or highest, or the six material principles becoming purified and merging with the Soul. This is a very important hint which you should remember in view of the higher studies to come. Remember also the symbolism of the Rig Veda where Surya, the 'Son', offers Himself as a sacrifice to Himself; and the Initiate, who sacrifices his physical Self to his Spiritual Self. 
St. Denys, the Areopagite, affirms that; "The Sun is the special signification, and the statue of God.... It is by the Eastern door that the 
glory of the Lord penetrated into the Temples" (of the Jews and Christians; that Divine Glory being Sun-light). 
St. Ambrose says; "We build our Churches towards the East, for during the Mysteries we begin by renouncing him who is in the West". "He who is in the West" is Typhon, the Egyptian God of Darkness the West having been held by them as the "Typhonic Gate of Death”. St. Peter tells us: "May the Divine Lucifer arise in your hearts". Lucifer is the 'Eye' of the Sun, in the form of the planet Venus. 
An Ecumenical Council having authoritatively put a stop to Christian Astrolatry by declaring that there were no sidereal Souls in the Sun, Moon or Planets, St. Thomas took it upon himself to settle the point in dispute. The 'angelic doctor' announced that such expressions did not mean a 'Soul', but only an 'Intelligence', not resident in the Sun and Stars, but one that assisted them, "a guiding and directing intelligence". 
Nevertheless the Church has preserved in her most sacred rites the "Star-rites" of the Pagan Deities. In the pre-Christian Mithraic Mysteries, the candidate who overcame successfully the "twelve tortures", which preceded the final Initiation, received a small round cake or wafer of unleavened bread, symbolising, in one of its meanings, the Solar disc, and known as the manna (heavenly bread). 
A well-known Orphic verse reads: "It is Zeus, it is Adas, it is the Sun, it is Bacchus", these names having been synonymous for classic poets or writers. Thus for Democritus: "Deity is but a Soul in an orbicular fire", and that fire is the Sun. For Iamblichus the Sun was "the image of divine intelligence", for Plato "an immortal living Being". Hence the Oracle of Claros when asked to say who was the Jehovah of the Jews, answered, "It is the Sun". We may add the words in Psalm 19 verses 4 and 6: "In the Sun hath he placed a tabernacle for himself... his going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof". 
The King James Authorised English Bible has; "In them (the heavens) hath he set a tabernacle for the Sun", which is incorrect and has no sense in view of the verse that follows, for there are things "hid from the heat thereof" if the latter word is applied to the Sun. However disfigured may be the words and sense in the English Authorised Bible, the Vulgate (Latin) and the Septuagint (Greek) both give the correct text of the original, and translate the latter: "In the Sun he established his abode"; while the Vulgate regards the "heat" as coming direct from God and not from the Sun alone, since it is God who issues forth from, and dwells in the Sun and performs the circuit. 
From these facts it will be seen that the Protestants were right in charging St. Justin with saying that "God has permitted us to worship the Sun”. And this, notwithstanding the lame excuses that what was really meant was "God permitted himself to be worshipped in, or within, the Sun", which is all the same. 
May the Divine Sun warm and invigorate all your being with its sacred Rays. 
Your Hidden Master. 
