SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 22. 
Dear Disciple, 
We have told you previously that there are several ways of regarding the position - if thus we may term it occupied by Spirit in contradistinction to the position occupied by matter. It is said that the way to the 'spirit' leads 'inwards'; it is also said that Spirit lies 'beyond' or 'above' matter. But in the Zohar, where it speaks of Spirit as the Sun's Rector, the Sun itself not being regarded as Spirit, Spirit is referred to as being 'on', or 'under' the Sun. The Chevalier Drach, whom we mentioned in lecture 21 of this Grade, tries to show that it was Christ who was meant by the 'Sun', or the Solar Spirit therein. In his comment upon that passage which refers to the Solar Spirit as "the stone which the builders rejected", he asserts most positively that this "Sun-Stone is identical with Christ, who was that stone", and that, therefore "the Sun is undeniably the second hypostasis of the Deity, or Christ". If this is true, then the Vedic or pre-Vedic Aryans, Chaldæns and Egyptians like all Occultists past, present and future, Jews included, have been Christians from all eternity. If this is not so, then modern Church Christianity is Paganism pure and simple exoterically, and transcendental and practical Magic, or Occultism esoterically. For this 'stone" has a manifold significance, a dual existence, with gradations, a regular progression and retrogression. 
— 
The Occultists are quite ready to agree with St. Chrysostom, that the infidels the profane rather "Being blinded by Sun-Light, thus lose sight of the true Sun in the contemplation of the false one". But if that Saint, and along with him the Hebraist Drach, chose to see in the Zohar and the Kabalistic Sun "the second hypostasis", this is no reason why all others should be blinded by them. The mystery of the Sun is the grandest perhaps, of all the innumerable mysteries of Occultism. A Gordian knot, truly, but one that cannot be severed with the double-edged sword of scholastic casuistry. It is a knot that can be untied only by the Gods. The meaning of this is plain, and every real Kabalist will understand it. 
Contra solem ne loquaris (speak not against the Sun) was not said by Pythagoras with regard to the visible Sun. It was the 'Sun of Initiation' that was meant, in its triple form two of which are the 'Day-Sun' and the 'Night-Sun'. If behind the visible luminary there were no mystery that people sensed instinctively, why should every nation, from the primitive peoples down to the Parsees of today, have turned towards the Sun during Prayers? The Solar Trinity is not Mazdean, but universal, and is as old as man. 
The words "Our Lord the Sun" were used in prayer by Christians up to the fifth and sixth century of our era, and embodied in the Liturgy, until altered into "Our Lord, the God". We should know that the early Christians painted Christ on the walls of their subterranean necropolis as a shepherd in the guise of, and invested with all the attributes of Apollo, driving away the wolf, Fenris, who seeks to devour the Sun and his Satellites. 
Plato says; "Know then, Glaucus, that when I speak of the production of good, it is the Sun I mean. The Son has a perfect analogy with his Father". Iamblichus calls the Sun; "the image of Divine Intelligence, or Wisdom". Eusebius, repeating the words of Philo, calls the rising Sun the Chief Angel, the most ancient, adding that the Archangel, who is polyonymous (of many words) is the Verbum, or Christ. 
The word Sol (Sun) being derived from solus, the One, or the "He alone", and its Greek name Helios meaning the 'Most High', the emblem becomes comprehensible. Nevertheless, the Ancients made a difference between the Sun and its prototype. 
Socrates saluted the rising Sun as does a true Parsee or Zoroastrian in our own day; and Homer and Euripides, as Plato did after them several times, mention the Jupiter-Logos, the "Word", or the Sun. 
Nevertheless, the Christians maintain that since the Oracle consulted on the God Iao answered; "It is the Sun", therefore "The Jehovah of the Jews was well known to the Pagans and Greeks" (Marquis de Mirville), and "Iao is our Jehovah". The first part of the proposition has nothing to do, it seems, with the second part, and least of all can the conclusion be regarded as correct. But if the Christians are so anxious to prove the identity, Occultists (who may nevertheless be Christians as well as Occultists) have nothing against it. Only, in such case, Jehovah is also Bacchus! 
It is very strange that the people of civilised Christendom should until now hold on so desperately to the skirts of the idolatrous Jews Sabæans and Sun-worshippers as they were, like the rabble of Chaldæa and that they should fail to see that the later Jehovah is but a Jewish development of the Ja-va, or the Iao, of the Phoenicians; that this name, in short, was the secret name of a Mystery God, one of the many Kabiri. 
"Highest God" as He was for a little nation, he never was so regarded by the Initiates who constructed the Mysteries; for them he was but a Planetary Spirit attached to the visible Sun; and the visible Sun is only the central star of our Solar System, or Kosmos, and not the Central Spiritual Sun. "And the Angel of the Lord said unto him (Manoah) why askest thou thus after my name, seeing it is secret?" (Judges, XIII. 18). Samson, Manoah's son, was an initiate of that "Mystery Lord", Ja-va; he was consecrated before his birth to become a 'Nazarite' (a chela, or disciple), an Adept. His sin with Dalilah, and the cropping of his long hair that "no razor was to touch" shows how well he kept his sacred vow. True, Movers gives a definition of the Phoenician idea of the ideal sunlight as a spiritual influence issuing from the highest God, Iao, "the light conceivable only by intellect the physical and spiritual Principle of all things; out of which the Soul emanates". It was the male Essence, or Wisdom, while the primitive Matter, or Chaos, was the female. Thus the first two Principles, co-eternal and infinite, were already with the primitive Phoenicians, spirit and matter. But this is the echo of Jewish thought; not the opinion of Pagan Philosophers. However this may be, the identity of the Jehovah of Mount Sinai with the God Bacchus is hardly disputable, and he is surely Dionysos. 

The boasted wide gap between Christianity and Judaism, that is claimed on the authority of Paul, exists but in the imagination of the pious. We are nought but the inheritors of the intolerant Israelites of ancient days; not the Hebrews of the time of Herod and the Roman dominion, who, with all their faults, kept strictly orthodox and monotheistic, but the Jews who, under the name of Jehovah-Nissi, worshipped Bacchus-Osiris, Dio-Nysos, the multiform Jove of Nyssa, the Sinai of Moses. The Kabalistic demons allegories of the profoundest meaning were adopted as objective entities, and a Satanic hierarchy carefully drawn by the orthodox demonologists. 
The motto; 'Igne natura renovatur integra', which the alchemists interpret as nature renovated by fire, or matter by spirit, is made to be accepted to this day as 'Iesus Nazarenus rex Iudæorum' 
The mocking satire of Pilate is accepted literally; and the Jews made to unwittingly confess thereby the royalty of Christ; whereas, if the inscription is not a forgery of the Constantinian period, it yet is the action of Pilate against which the Jews were the first to protest violently. 
I.H.S. is interpreted Iesus Hominum Salvator, and In Hoc Signo, whereas IHE is one of the most ancient names of Bacchus. And more than ever do we begin to discover, by the bright light of comparative theology, that the great object of Jesus, the Initiate of the Inner Sanctuary, was to open the eyes of the fanatical multitude to the difference between the highest Divinity the mysterious and never mentioned IAO of the ancient Chaldean and later Neo-platonic Initiates and the Hebrew Yahuh, or Yaho (Jehovah). Wherever Bacchus was worshipped there was a tradition of Nyssa and a cave where he was reared. Beth-San, or Scythopolis, in Palestine had that designation; so also had a spot on Mount Parnassus. But Diodorus Siculus declares that Nyssa was between Phoenicia and Egypt. Euripides states that Dionysos came to Greece from India; and Diodorus adds his testimony: "Osiris was brought up in Nyssa, in Arabia the Happy; he was the son of Zeus, and was named from his Father (nominative Zeus, genitive Dios) and the place Dio-nysos" the Zeus of Jove of Nyssa. This identity of name or title is very significant. In Greece Dionysos was second only to Zeus, and Pindar says; "So Father Zeus governs all things, and Bacchus he governs also". 
Outside Greece, Bacchus was the all-powerful "Zagreus, the highest of Gods", in whose service was Orpheus, the Founder of the Mysteries. How, unless it be recognised that Moses was an initiated Priest, and an Egyptian Adept, whose actions are all narrated allegorically, then it must be admitted that he personally, together with his host of Israelites, worshipped Bacchus. 
"And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah Nissi (or, Iao-Nissi, or again: Dionissi). 
To strengthen the statement we have further to remember that the place where Osiris, the Egyptian Zagreus or Bacchus, was born, was Mount Sinai!! The brazen serpent was a nis, and the month of the Jewish Passover is Nisan. 
There will be plenty to meditate upon in this important lecture, and we ask you also not to forget your various exercises etc., which will be extended a little further soon. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
