SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 25. 

Dear Disciple, 
In Grade 1 we made a short reference to the meaning of the words 'Imaging' and 'Imagination'; let us examine the meaning of these words a little closer for a moment, for they have a bearing on an exercise we shall give you presently. 
Imagination is the act or faculty of forming a mental image of an object, or the generic name for the totality of such images; it is also the consciousness of objects other than those now present to the senses and the reproduction or combination of memories of sense-objects; especially, the higher forms of this process manifested in poetry and art. 
Imagination is commonly divided into reproductive and productive; reproductive imagination being the act or faculty of reproducing images stored in the memory under the suggestion of associated images; productive imagination being the creative imagination which designedly recombines former experiences into new images. The phrase 'productive imagination' is also used in the Kantian philosophy to denote the pure transcendental imagination, or that faculty by which the parts of the intuitions of space and time are combined into continua. 

"as imagination bodies forth 
The forms of things unknown, the poet's pen Turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing A local habitation and a name" 
says Shakespeare. 
(A Midsummer Night's Dream; Act IV) 


And Henry Maudsley (1835-1918), in 'Body and Will', states: "It is evident that true imagination is vastly different from fancy; far from being merely a playful outcome of mental activity, a thing of joy and beauty only, it forms the initial and essential functions in every branch of human development." 
There are many kinds of imagination. It may take the form of an image in the mind, a formulated conception or idea; and Locke says in 'An Essay Concerning Human Understanding', "he that uses the word 'tarantula' without having any imagination or idea of what it stands for produces a good word, but so long means nothing at all by it." 

It may take the form of the act of devising, planning or scheming; a contrivance; scheme; device or plot. 
It can also be a baseless or fanciful opinion, and in his 'Letters' (Number 22) John Donne (1572-1631) says: "For my purpose of proceeding in the profession of the Law, so far as to a title, you may be pleased to correct that imagination where you find it," 
On the other hand, Locke states: "We are apt to think that space, in itself, is actually boundless; to which imagination the idea of space or expansion of itself naturally leads us". But there is much more to the last quoted verse than Locke could imagine; this you know already and will realise more and more in time. 
Wordsworth said: "By derivation and early use fancy has the same meaning as imagination, but the words have become more and more distinctly separated. Imagination is the more profound, earnest, logical. Fancy is lighter, more sportive, and often more purely creative. We call 'Hamlet' and 'Macbeth' works of Shakespeare's imagination, the 'Midsummer Night's Dream' and 'The Tempest' of his fancy." 
James Russell Lowell (1819-1891), in 'Among my Books', says: "Consider for a moment if ever imagination has been so embodied as in Prospero, the Fancy in Ariel, the brute understanding as in Caliban”. This is an excellent description, for Lowell here places Understanding where it belongs; namely; in the material part of our 'thinking' or 'intellect'. 
In 'David and Goliath', Hannah More (1745-1833) says: "Warm glowing colours fancy spreads on objects not yet known". We are getting closer and closer to our own concepts of Imagination and fancy, as you will have noticed already. 
Imaging can be described shortly as: the forming of mental images; and; expression by means of imagery; but only the first part of this sentence concerns us now. 
But true imagination and fancy must be rigidly controlled if we do not wish to be classed among those referred to by Glanvill in his 'Vanity of Dogmatizing' in which he writes: "Story is full of the wonders it works upon hypochondrical imaginants; to whom the grossest absurd- ities are infallible certainties, and free reason an impostour". In other words, we must learn to use our imagination in a scientific manner; be able to distinguish true imagination from false hallucination, and this is one of the reasons why we teach you Occult Science, and not Occult speculations, vapid dreams, wishful thinking, and other unreliable vagaries, whims, freaks, caprices and crotchets. 
That imagination can be used and trained in a scientific manner is true; even in mathematics we find the imaginary calculus, ens, imaginary co-ordinates, curves, envelopes, exponents, integrals, points, quantities, tangents and transformations. That scientists use their imagination to a larger extent than they would care to admit we have proved to you in Lecture 48 of Grade 1 (pp5), when we gave you a chronological table of the different theories of the temperature of the Sun - according to a number of otherwise eminent Astronomers! 
So if Scientists are permitted to indulge in their imaginations, there is no reason why we should not do so too; only, in our case, we must do it in the true scientific manner!! That is to say: in accordance with Occult Scientific laws and rules. 
In Psychology, the term 'Imagination' is technically used for the process of reviving in the mind 'percepts' of objects formerly given in sense perception. Since this use of the term conflicts with that of ordinary language (and such things are unavoidable when we deal with subjects for which there simply are no words in ordinary language), some psychologists have preferred to describe this process as 'imaging' or 'imagery', or to speak of it as 'reproductive' as opposed to 'prod- uctive' or 'constructive' imagination. But the psychological concepts of imagination and imaging are neither the one nor the other, as you will see anon. 
In various spheres imagination is in practise limited: thus a man whose imaginations do violence to the elementary laws of thought (whatever one may mean by this expression), or to the necessary principles of practical possibility, or to the reasonable probabilities of a given case is regarded as insane. The same limitations beset imagination in the field of scientific hypothesis. Progress in scientific research is due largely to provisional explanations which are constructed by imagination; but such hypothesis must be framed in relation to previously ascertained facts, and in accordance with the principles of the particular Science. There must be objective control of subjective activity, and the distinction between controlled imagination and unbridled fancy depends in practise on knowledge, training, and the like. 
Although, however, the absence of objective restraint, i.e., a certain unreality, is characteristic of some types of imagination, none the less it can have practical importance as a purely ideational activity. Its very freedom from objective limitation makes it a source of pleasure and pain. A person of vivid imagination suffers acutely from the imagination of perils besetting a friend. In fact in some cases the ideal construction is so 'real' that specific physical manifestations occur, as though imagination had passed into belief, or the events imagined were actually in progress. And it is against this sort of imagination we must be on our guard at all times. For it is possible to create the very conditions of peril and danger we wish to avoid on behalf of our friend; though it is not always probable that our imagination is strong enough to make these thought-forms become active objectively. Such kinds of imagination are caused by fear; therefore they are negative, destructive, and cannot reach positive actuality. If, on the other hand, we really conjecture or know that our friend might be in peril, we can help him by imagining first, and imaging afterwards conditions of safety, happiness, protection and well-being. This is one aspect or example of how to control imagination. 
But to make such protection really effective you should after you have succeeded in imaging the picture of your friend in a condition of safety - project into it from your Higher Mind the pin-point of Light we told you about previously in Lecture number 2 of this Grade. When this is done make it grow if you can, until it illumines the scene you have created by imaging your imaginatory picture. There is only one way by which you can make sure that you have made a true image, and that is to be able to see the scene with closed eyes, as we told you to see colours. You may be able to see the scene as if it were painted upon your eyelids; you may actually penetrate that scene conjured up by your imagination and fixed by imaging; it all depends upon your natural gifts, developed by the previously given exercises. Needless to say, you should be completely at Peace and fully relaxed. 
If you are successful with this exercise the whole picture may eventually change completely, until you have actually projected to your friend by extending your consciousness to the place where he is at the moment. But do not try to do so; it must come of its own accord. Should the image (once you have produced it) become dark or even black, that means that there is a barrier around your friend which you must not try to penetrate. There are times in the life of all of us when we wish to be entirely private; no matter what the reason for this may be. In such cases it would be a very wrong action if we tried to break in upon the privacy of any one. It is strictly forbidden, and if by any chance we should succeed in forcing our way in (which is most unlikely, however), then the punishment follows swiftly, in that all our powers of seeing clairvoyantly, or of projection or extension of consciousness, are taken away from us for the rest of this incarnation, and sometimes even for many incarnations. We then find ourselves surrounded at all times by a thick, though invisible wall or curtain which nothing can penetrate. We have become outcasts, and must dwell in darkness after that for a time. This is an unalterable and wise as well as just Occult Law, and it is well that you should know of its existence. Not only will you be unable to pass this barrier in future, but, should you ever be in trouble of any sort in future, and need protection from others yourself, then, whoever may try to help you will be unable to reach you either on account of that wall. Furthermore, if such a person should at any time be in such a condition of mind that he entertains feelings of hatred or ill-will towards others, such thoughts, which under normal conditions might be lost and dissolved in space, will turn upon him with trebled force and rend him; thus many people have destroyed themselves in their ignorance. 

This also emphasises once again the great importance of being always at peace within, no matter what the temptations may be to be otherwise. Should you at any time stray by means of extension of consciousness or projection accidentally to a place where you will sense or know at once that you are intruding, close the vision immediately and forget what you have witnessed. It is very unlikely that such a thing may ever come to pass, but one never knows, and we are aware of such instances, rare as they are; but provided that you withdraw at once, you will not be punished in such cases, for the laws are very just at all times. 
Please try the experiment now and do it several times each week until you succeed, and let us know after the next Lecture what success you have had. You may, of course, choose your own subject or locality to project to; and it need not necessarily be a locality on the Earth-plane. You may try to reach some clime within the next plane above, if you wish. Do not forget your usual prayer for protection, whatever you decide to do in this matter. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
