Grade 2. Number 27. 
Dear Disciple, 
We may say the same about Magic as Jane Porter says about Nobility, namely: "Nobility without virtue is a fine setting without a gem"; for without all the virtues to bear upon the Magic Arts, they are devoid of those qualities which are commonly called 'White' by Occultists and Mystics. In the olden times the science was one of the principal domains of the Priesthood, and the Ancients knew more about certain sciences than our modern savants have yet discovered. The Editor of Salverte's 'Occult Sciences', Dr. A. Todd Thomson, remarked: "The degree of scientific knowledge existing in an early period of society was much greater than the moderns are willing to admit; but it was confined to the Temples, carefully veiled from the eyes of the people". Origen, who had belonged to the Alexandrian School of Platonists, declares that Moses, besides the Teachings of the Covenant, communicated some very important secrets "from the hidden depths of the law" to the seventy elders. These he enjoined them to impart only to persons whom they found worthy. The same old tried, inviolable law! In connection with this we must remind you that St. Jerome names the Jews of Tiberias and Lydda as the only (then known) teachers of the mystical manner of interpretation. 
Finally, Ennemoser expresses a strong opinion that: "the writings of Dionysius Areopagita have palpably been grounded on the Jewish Kabalah". When we take into consideration that the Gnostics, or early Christians, were but the followers of the old Essenes under a new name, this fact is nothing to be wondered at. In his 'Philosophy of History and Traditions', Professor Moliter gives the Kabalah its just due when he writes: "The age of inconsequence and shallowness, in Theology as well as in sciences, is past, and since that revolutionary rationalism has left nothing behind but its own emptiness, after having destroyed everything positive, it seems now to be the time to direct our attention anew to that mysterious revelation which is the living spring whence our salvation must come....the mysteries of Ancient Israel, which contain all the secrets of Modern Israel, would be particularly calculated to....found the fabric of theology upon its deepest theosophical (Wisdom-Science, or God-Science) principles, and gain a firm basis to all ideal sciences. It would open up a new path....to the obscure labyrinth of the myths, mysteries and constitution of primitive (?) nations....In these traditions alone are contained the system of the Schools of the Prophets, which the prophet Samuel did not found, but only restored, whose end was no other than to lead the scholars to wisdom and the highest knowledge, and when they had been found worthy, to induct them into deeper mysteries. 
"Classed with these mysteries was Magic, which was of a double nature divine magic, and evil magic, the black art. Each of these is again divisible into two kinds, the active and the seeing; in the first, man endeavours to place himself en rapport with the world to learn hidden things; in the latter he endeavours to gain power over spirits (and under this heading comes Spiritualism); in the former, to perform good and beneficial acts; in the latter to do all kinds of diabolical and unnatural deeds". 
The clergy of the three most prominent Christian bodies, the Greek, Roman Catholic, and Protestant, discountenance every spiritual phenomenon manifesting through so-called "mediums". A very brief period, indeed, has elapsed since both the two latter ecclesiastical corporations burned, hanged and otherwise murdered every helpless victim through whose organisms spirits and sometimes blind and as yet (for the laity) unexplained forces of nature manifested themselves. At the head of these three churches, pre-eminent stands the Church of Rome. Her hands are scarlet with the innocent blood of countless victims shed in the name of the Moloch-like divinity at the head of her creed. She would begin again tomorrow if she could, but she is bound hand and foot by that modern spirit of progress and religious freedom which she still reviles and blasphemes daily. 
Yet there is behind all this former merciless persecution a very solid reason, based on the forgotten science of the ancient Hierophants. When we reach the subject of Spiritualism in the Inner Circle of our Teachings you will learn all the secret laws and principles underlying the different spiritual and other phenomena that can take place at séances; and you will be astounded at the very great dangers to which the 'sitters' as well as the 'medium' are subject when there is any real power available. But we must learn all sorts of other laws and principles first; else the scientific explanations will be impossible to grasp. 
In most men the divine intellect is veiled; it is only his animal brain that 'philosophises' under the ignorant urge of the lower mind; his Higher Mind is too powerless as yet to take control. This does not matter on the whole; for it is necessary for man to walk along the path of material darkness until such time as the first glimpse of light beckons in the distance. It is part of man's evolution; by trial and error only can he learn and get experience. Formerly, Magic was a universal science, entirely in the hands of the sacerdotal savant. Though the focus was jealously guarded in the sanctuaries, its rays illuminated the whole of mankind. Otherwise, how are we to account for the extraordinary identity of 'superstitions', customs, traditions and even sentences, repeated in popular proverbs so widely scattered from one pole to the other that we find exactly the same ideas among the Tartars and Laplanders as among the Southern nations of Europe, the inhabitants of the Steppes of Russia, and aborigines of North and South America? For instance, Tyler shows one of the Ancient Pythagorean maxims, "Do not stir the fire with the sword", as popular among a number of nations which have not the slightest connection with each other. He quotes de Piano Carpini, who found this tradition prevailing among the Tartars as far back as 1264. A Tartar will not consent for any amount of money to stick a knife into the fire, or touch it with any sharp or pointed instrument, for fear of cutting “the head of the fire”. The Kamtchadal of North-Eastern Asia consider it a great sin to do so. The Sioux Indians of North America dare not touch the fire with either needle, knife or any sharp instrument. The Kalmucks entertain the same dread; and an Abyssinian would rather bury his bare arms to the elbows in blazing coals than use an axe or knife near them. 
Every sentence of Pythagoras, like most of the ancient maxims, has a dual significance; and, while it had an Occult physical meaning, expressed literally in words, it embodied a moral precept, which is explained by Iamblichus in his 'Life of Pythagoras'. This "Dig not fire with a sword", is the ninth symbol in the 'Protreptics' of this Neo-Platonist. "This symbol", he says, "exhorts to prudence". It shows "the propriety of not opposing sharp words to a man full of fire and wrath not contending with him. For frequently by uncivil words you will agitate and disturb an ignorant man, and you will suffer yourself.... Heraclitus also testifies to the truth of this symbol. For he says, 'It is difficult to fight with anger, for whatever is necessary to be done redeems the soul'. And this he says truly. For many, by gratifying anger, have changed the condition of their soul, and have made death preferable to life". 
If we regard the above from a moral point of view only, and leave the Occult meaning out of it for the time being, we have here already an allusion to White and Black Magic. To give way to anger is to become negative; and any negative action or thought can be graded as coming under the heading of Black Magic. It either destroys or must be destroyed; and the actor or thinker with it if the act or thought is strong and evil enough. 
In this last paragraph is locked up a very great Teaching indeed. Please study it, in spite of its seeming obviousness and simplicity, and think of all the negative acts and thoughts you have produced yourself, and are very likely producing daily! This is self-examination of a very high order, and it will help you guard all your future acts and thoughts, and bring to bear upon them the Divine Light of Peace which is Pure and White Magic!! Worry, fear, disdain, distrust of the benevolent Powers watching over you; impatience, anger, hatred, restlessness and a host of other similar things they are all negative and belong to the realms of Black Magic to a lesser or greater degree; even if those negative thoughts and acts are only so slightly negative as to be of a pale grey hue! Anything that dims the Light belongs to the realms of darkness; this is obvious. But do we always remember it? Hardly; for if you did you would be a shining angel, a true saint, an unblemished, pure and perfect, Son or Daughter of God and you would not be of this Earth: for there is no such thing as pure and unblemished perfection on this Earth Plane. 
Be not discouraged, therefore; but strive ever for that holy perfection nevertheless; for the more perfect we try to become, the more chance there is that we may reach the Path to the Sun in one final step. 
In the next three lectures we shall consider the functions of the brain and nerves as taught by Science. And we shall make an interjection here and there to show where Science is mistaken. It is necessary to study this subject in view of things to come in our Lectures, but as the next three lectures are of a more physical nature than those which you have had lately, it will give you an opportunity to make a really big effort with the various exercises and meditations. The latter are all essential for your progress in awakening your inner and hidden powers; so we hope you will be able to make that great effort; no matter how well you have succeeded with all these things in the past. This applies also to the mirror-practise; and nearly every one of you has had private letters from us on this subject, for the effects of these latter exercises differ with everybody and cannot be treated generally in these lectures. 
With best wishes. 
Your Hidden Master. 
