SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 28. 

Dear Disciple, 
There is a great deal of literature obtainable about the Mind and its workings, but apart from Medical textbooks, very little has been published, for the layman, concerning the mechanism of the Brain, its functions and possibilities. We are apt to think of the Mind as something which exists in a world of its own, forgetting that it has to manifest through those organs of the body which we call the Nervous System. The human brain is the most important thing in the world, yet few know anything about it, in fact it is only in recent years that much knowledge concerning it has become available. The two World Wars of the last century and the many conflicts around the world since then have provided a vast field for the study of the way in which the brain functions, through observation of the results of head injuries. 
For many years past there has been a tendency to emphasise the influence of psychological factors in physical conditions and to overlook the physical element in psychology itself. We can observe a good deal in ourselves and also in other people if we set aside all common conceptions of time and space, for an impulse travels over a nerve at the rate of about 300 feet per second (90 metres per second). The working of the nervous system involves a ceaseless stream of messages passing to and fro over a network of nerve fibres; so swiftly and smoothly, in such numbers and routes linked up by so many points and junctions that all we can grasp is the rhythm, ignoring the infinite intricacy of the mechanism involved. 
We can realise the importance of the hand and eye, singly or in team work, but nerve cells are too small to be seen; the 5th cranial nerve, which serves the sensation of one whole side of the face, is but the size and consistency of a piece of wet string. Moreover the nerves are hidden, and we cannot feel the Mind thinking. When we say a Man has brains, it is a compliment, but if we say he has nerves it is taken as disparagement, yet brains are made up of nerves, and the more nerves the better the brain. The man who is supplied with well-grown and well-nourished nerve cells has the fullest and richest experience of the Universe about him, for he is literally more closely in touch with 'life'. His senses are alert, ready to tune in with a wide range of messages from outside, which on the switchboard of his nervous system, can be linked up in countless combinations and call forth an infinite variety of responses. (One statement in the above is illuminating: “We cannot feel the mind thinking". Why not? Because the Higher Mind is not a part of the 'physical' body. It uses the brain as an instrument only; and the more perfect the instrument the more varied and sublime the 'tune' played upon it by the Higher Mind, the richer the life, the more varied the understanding and manipulation of all things material) 
The nervous system is to the brain rather as the circulation to the heart 
an expression of its activity. Let us first see what the nerves are like. The nervous system is built up of chains of separate living entities which in themselves are insensible to pain, but are conductors through which chemical and electric charges can pass to and fro between the organs of the body and between the body and the world around. A ‘nerve' resembles a cable in which 'neurons' form the separate links. These are massed together to form a 'cable' in a sheath of fibrous casing. Each neuron has a central body which contains a nucleus which supplies the whole with nourishment. From the cell body, fibres are thrown out in all directions, one of which is the 'axon' or root, while the rest are known as 'dendrons'. The axon of a sensory, incoming neuron has fine finger-like endings which are fitted to pick up messages from the outer world, or from other neurons, and pass them to the cell body, whence they travel over one or other of the dendrons till they reach a 'synapse' which is the junction with the next neuron in the chain. The nerves form one-way streets and are paired into up and down lines for the incoming and outgoing messages. The exact nature of the impulses passed over the neurons is not known, but it is believed that when a neuron has been stimulated some form of electrical discharge takes place which acts as a stimulus to the next neuron. The neurons are not in direct contact with each other, but are separated by a fine film of insulating matter, and the impulse passes this by a chemical change electrically produced at this point. At birth a few nerves, or chains of neurons, are already coated with a glistening white fatty substance called myelin, which insulates each nerve fibre from its neighbour, and it is noted that these are the ones first needed by the child. As time goes on, more and more develop this covering without which the nerves cannot function properly. This further myelinisation is dependent on stimulus received through the senses. For instance, the more a child can see and hear the more neurons become myelinated and the better do their senses function. 
The nerves of the body are grouped into three great circuits all closely interwoven, but each having its own special field of activity. The first two belong to the oldest part of the nervous system, that known as the Cerebro-Spinal System. 
(1.) The First Circuit may be considered as the nerves of external perception and are connected with the five senses. The incoming nerves of this system run from the body surface to the brain, 
and the outgoing ones run back to the muscles lying under the surface, and have power to contract or relax them. The journey either way between skin and brain is made in three stages, that is to say over three neurons, which roughly correspond to three stages of evolution. The first, from the skin to the spine, represents the earliest nervous system, when our ancestors had no brain beyond a small group of nerves in their middles; the second, from the spine to the newer centres in the head, was a much later extension, and the third, links those same centres (now called the old brain) with the Cortex or intelligent brain of man and the higher animals. 
The incoming nerves enter the spinal cord at the back, between one vertebra and the next, while outgoing ones leave in the same way at the front. Although the up and down lines never meet, they are linked by a short neuron which forms a bridge between them, just inside the spine, so that it is possible for a message to be sent back through this local exchange without the brain knowing anything about it. As we have seen; this was the oldest nervous circuit and, in certain conditions, it can still function, how and when will be discussed later. We are apt to think of the spine as a collection of bones, which it is, but these bones are hollow, developed to protect the nerve cables which pass through them, forming what we call the spinal cord. The nerves in this circuit cross over in the spine, the purpose of which is unknown, and injury to the left side of the head will cause paralysis of the right side of the body and vice versa. 
(2.) The Second nervous circuit is that of the Proprioceptors, or nerves of self-perception, which, instead of arising under the skin, have their origin (and ending) in the muscles and joints. They are concerned with the responses of instinct and also with semi-conscious activity, especially with our position in space, and the movements involving time and space together. Except for such movements as are needed to keep the body balanced they do not originate movement, but must be set going by the impulse from an external nerve (1st circuit) which has, in turn received some stimulus from the outer world. But once the impulse has come through, they will carry out manoeuvres of amazing extent and accuracy. These muscle nerves pass up the spinal cord to the headquarters in the Cerebellum, or little brain, on the same side (without crossing over) where they are linked up with the balancing apparatus in the ears. Injury to the Cerebellum is recognised by errors of balance and of movement and it is possible, by watching an animal's activity, to make a fair guess how highly this part of the brain is developed. For instance, a tortoise who needs little or no poise or swiftness of motion has a very small cerebellum, whereas in a bird it is the dominant department of the brain. 
(3.) The third and final circuit is that of the Autonomic nerves, whose function is to control the never ceasing work of the internal organs. This circuit is often called the Sympathetic Nervous System, which consists of a great self-governing dominion which manages its own affairs and sees man on his way from cradle to grave, giving him breath and heartbeats, nourishment and the power to beget young, always linked up with the brain, yet working independently, they form the real engine room of the human ship. Along either side of the spine there runs a strand of nerve fibres, having groupings or ganglia at intervals, with frequent and regular connections with the spinal system. From these nerve cables, nerve axons go towards the internal organs, carrying on communication with the whole of the interior of the trunk of the body. They respond neither to light nor sound, but to the chemical needs between one organ and another, increasing or slowing down the intake and consumption of the various secretions (glands), the whole being carried on by this great silent service of which, in health, we are completely unconscious. The connections and relations between the brain and the Sympathetic Nervous System are of immense importance as will be seen when we have investigated the brain itself. 

(When Science talks about "our ancestors" it is still using the jargon of the Darwinians. We must never lose sight of the fact that the animal human body is not the Divine Ego Self. The latter is its own ancestor, as it were, for it never had or will have a father or mother, being part of the 'Father-Mother' God, the Central Deity of the Universe. Man never was an animal, as we have already stated in Grade 1. Man's body was built by the Lunar Lords or Pitris, and the Spark of Life was placed within it by the Solar Lords. The Ego itself, Soul-Mind, only enters the human animal body when that body is ready for occupation by the Higher Mind. Just how the Lunar Creators have built that human body..... whether they created it out of the dust of the Earth literally, or built it up gradually by slowly perfecting one branch of the animal kingdom until the human form was complete in the form as we know it today, or as a less perfect structure the so-called 'missing link' of material Science has no place in this grade, but will be discussed in the future. Please read lectures 28-29-30 of this grade in the light of this statement.) 
— 
The study of brain and nerves will be continued next week. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
