Dear Disciple, 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 20. 
We shall now conclude our talks on 'Thought' with a few final quotations from some of the great thinkers, and the first quotation is from the Occult Dictionary of Lewis Spence: 
"The idea of inter-communication between brain and brain, by other means than that of the ordinary sense-channels is a theory deserving of the most careful consideration, not only in its simple aspects as a claimant for recognition, an important scientific fact, but also there is practically no department of psychic phenomena on which it has not some bearing". 
The above refers, of course to thought transference; a subject of later study in our lectures. But we should hesitate to term it a "scientific fact" ourselves: for its laws are not known for certain by either ordinary science or the layman; nor does the mere dabbler in the Occult or in Mysticism know any of the laws connected with it. It therefore belongs entirely to the realms of Occult Science, and this being necessarily hidden, it can become a scientific fact only to our students in the later studies. 
"With the mere interpretation of all the phenomena of the Cosmos as expressions of matter and motion, and therefore of energy, nothing more is obtained than a resolution of an agglomeration of thought products into their simplest symbols", says Herbert Spencer. We agree with this in the light of our own Teachings only; for any other interpretation would be wrong-being against all the laws of matter, motion and energy. 
Mrs. Jameson (1794-1860), calls thoughts: "Those recesses of the inner life, which the God who made us keeps from every eye but His own". This is true Occultism in every sense of the word. 
Antonius teaches: "Our dispositions will be suitable to that which we most frequently think on; for the soul is, as it were, tinged with the colour and complexion of its own thoughts". In other words: with that which it attunes with. Please bear this in mind when we discuss 'Karma'; a subject that is completely misunderstood, misinterpreted and mishandled by the ignorant and foolish, and subject to greater abuses and feeble excuses for one's own failings than almost any Occult speculation. We have, so far, found only one writer who did understand it. Shakespeare says succinctly in The Rape of Lucrece: "Thoughts are but dreams till their effects be tried". 
Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809-1894), in his inimitable “Breakfast Talks" says truly: "A thought is often original, though you have uttered it a hundred times. It has come to you over a new route, by a new and express train of association". 
Sir William Crookes (1832-1919) stated: "It is known that the action of thought is accompanied by certain movements in the brain, and here we have physical vibrations capable from their extreme minuteness of acting direct on individual molecules, while their rapidity approaches that of the internal and external movements of the 
atoms themselves". 
You will all have noted that Crookes said accompanied by certain movements in the brain; he did not say that these movements are thought or cause it. We agree with the above statement, which is correct, but it is difficult to imagine why a 'supernatural' explanation of thought transference should be deemed necessary by some thinkers in view of the fact, and as an attempted contradiction of it, that many scientists and philosophers, as well as other thinkers, have come to the conclusion that thought is a mechanical physical action. 
Commencing with Lecture 2 of Grade 2 we have told you about that Secret essence which plays such a great role in our conceptions of being by means of our imaginations and ideas. We therefore know that thought is not a mechanical, physical action, not caused by molecular vibrations in the brain, but that it is of an electric nature, setting up certain molecular reactions in the brain.... and in the five senses as well!! Thought can flash from mind to mind, no matter on what different planes of consciousness the two minds are functioning at the time. It can and does travel with the speed of electricity, and, if we confine such thought-flashes to the Earth-plane alone, they can reach the antipodes in one-fourteenth of a second, the same speed as electricity, which circles the Earth in one-seventh of a second if directed and unretarded. 
Now in the last two underlined words of the previous sentence lies the sole key to success in telepathy, attunement, 'distant' healing, map- dowsing, and a host of other things. We must learn to direct our thoughts, and this can be done only by meditation and concentration, using the very simple methods we have already given you in connection with these two forms of attunement; but there can be obstruction in the path along which a thought travels! Such obstructions are indicated by the cold sensations during meditation and concentration, etc., about which we told you before. 
In "The Book of Fo", the third Messenger of God, appears the following: “Then the chief judges made answer; Verily thy five windows are the five senses of thy soul. He who closeth them, and admits not the light of the world, shall enjoy the light of his soul. But he who openeth them to all the outside world, shall sit in darkness, letting not his spirit put forth any of her own glorious internal light". Here is another key to possible obstructions when we wish to send forth thoughts to Higher Realms, or receive messages from the Soul to the Higher Mind. 
In Philo Judæus appears a cryptic message which the student of the Mysteries alone will be able to understand: "He who places all his hopes in God as in the Author of his existence, shall obtain for the price of his victory in the game of life that living person who is a compound of the Mortal and Immortal, being neither the same with, nor yet different from him by whom the prize is obtained". It alludes occultly to the finding of the Messiah by the truth-seeking Spirit; the Messiah who, Mortal (as man), and Immortal (as an Archangel) is yet not different from the lowliest, who is also a Son of God. That Messiah is the Soul within, to whom we must direct our thoughts in order to find the Path to Liberation. 
Although "thoughts" are not "physical", they are none the less of a “material” nature, for the secret "Essence", of which electricity is but one manifestation, is material; no matter how etherealised and sublimated it may be. It is not "Supernatural", nor is it even "super- material” — which is quite a different thing — and, moreover, there is no such thing as the "supernatural" in the Nature of the Universe, for if it were in it, it could not be above it; for the Latin prefix "super" means above, or in an earlier sense "from below upwards"; and to Occult conception any of the finer spiritual Realms proceed from without inwards. 
Science has confused Spiritual Thought, or thought of the Higher Mind, with the bodily sensations of the lower Mind. Whereas Professor Pritchet of Paris, believed that he could measure the amplitude of a thought as you can measure sound or light waves (that is to say: thoughts of the Higher Mind, of which Science has no conception), other Scientists have stated that he is wrong; for a light- wave could travel round the equator seven times a second speed as electricity, mark this well, and, aver these other scientists, even slow-going sound (in other words: obstructed sound!), does a thousand feet in a second (correct, of course); but say they a "nerve-wave" at its best makes only three hundred and fifty feet a second. The example they give is that if you count very fast you can count ten in a second, and it takes about a tenth of a second for a grown man to find out someone is jabbing his toe with a pin. There, they say, the expression "quick as a thought" should be changed to "slow as a thought." 
Here is a confirmation and justification of our Teachings of the Principles of a Higher and a Lower Mind, proved to be correct by Science itself, and not taught in any other Occult Order or School in any part of the world.... for none knows of this very ancient and hitherto entirely secret law, which is, or should be, still secret and known only to our Students, who have heard about it for the first time in their lives without exception anywhere, and who should not reveal it to others outside our Order, for our Lectures are marked secret at the top of every page!! 
Science was delighted when it had - (as "it" thought!!) - at last discovered what "thought" really is. Here is the statement: 
"Whatever thought, or consciousness, may be in itself, it can be defined in physical terms as the stimulation of a relatively wide area of the brain that is to say, the simultaneous activity of a large number of brain-cells. The action becomes unconscious when the area or number is lessened. This stimulation of a wide area can be affected only by means of nerve connections between the different cells. These connections are known as association fibres, and are perfectly discernible by the microscope. Their number is immense. Many cells have scores and even hundreds, and, as the cells are numbered by millions, it is easy to see that they reach to an unthinkable sum. It is by means of these association fibres that we have what is called "association of ideas." Clever people are evidently well provided with association fibres. Where these fibres are lacking there will be no stimulation of a wide area, and therefore no consciousness. This is the case in the lower forms of life, and in newborn animals, including babes. In all of these the anatomical demonstration is perfectly clear. To ascribe consciousness, in the ordinary sense, to worms, oysters, or new-born children is manifestly absurd." (Carl Snyder, 'New Conceptions in Science'. Harper & Brothers, London, 1904. ). 
Of all the nonsense about "consciousness" ever written this is really the last word. In the first place, this "consciousness" is only the con- sciousness of the bodily senses, as described in the above quotation. It is the consciousness of the Lower Mind, the body, and has no connection whatsoever with the Higher Mind. But even so, who shall deny even that consciousness to a worm, an oyster, or a newborn human child! 
Why does a worm wriggle when it is touched; why does an oyster close its shell when there is danger; why does a new-born babe cry when it draws in its Higher Mind, or Divine Principle, with its first breath; the Breath of Life!! There is only one kind of Thought; and that is the power of thinking and reasoning caused by the incipient Higher Mind of the animal whose instincts are of so high a nature that the future Higher Mind which the entity will acquire when it enters a human body in its first incarnation as such begins to manifest, however weakly, on account of the proximity in time of that coming event; or the thinking powers of the Higher Mind after it has entered a human form and commenced its cycles of incarnations. 
In that Principle alone, the Higher Mind, resides thought, for it is Thought as well as consciousness. 
But the consciousness of the senses is present in every living being; from plant to human, and, as a human baby has both a lower and a Higher Mind, to deny it even mere consciousness is manifestly absurd. 
We have, of course, no quarrel with the anatomical side of the above statement but it proves nevertheless, that Spirit can never be discovered by means of the scalpel or the microscope. 
At the times of true revelation or illumination one will find that the ordinary powers of thinking and reason fall away like dead leaves from the branch of a tree. One does not argue or deduce: one simply understands. One reaches the ultimate secrets in a flash of blinding light, the LIGHT of the SOUL, and the slow thinking processes of the material mind lag behind, like a snail that is left behind a swiftly running deer, pursued by the hounds. 
One realises actuality with the rapidity of lightning, and all becomes clear and lucid to the Higher Mind thus irradiated by the Wisdom of God's THOUGHTS!! 
May this transcendent happiness be yours. 
Your Hidden Master. 
