SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 21. 

Dear Student, 

The Temples of Antiquity were generally made to face the Sun, their portals open to the East. See the old Temples of Memphis and Baalbek, the Pyramids of Egypt and America, the Round Towers of Ireland and the Serapeum of Egypt. The Initiates alone could give a philosophical explanation of this, and the reason for it its mysticism notwithstanding if only the world were ready to receive it, which it is not any more today than in Antiquity. The last of the Solar Priests in Europe was the Imperial Initiate, Julian (331 - 363 AD), now called the Apostate. Julian died for the same crime as Socrates, both divulged a portion of the Solar Mystery, the heliocentric system being only a part of what was given during Initiation one consciously, the other unconsciously, the Greek Sage never having been initiated. It was not the real Solar System that was preserved in such secrecy, but the mysteries connected with the Sun's constitution. Socrates was condemned to death by earthly and worldly judges; Julian died a violent death because the hitherto protecting hand was withdrawn from him, and, no longer shielded by it, he was simply left to his destiny. For the student of Occultism there is a suggestive difference between the two kinds of death. 
Another memorable instance of the unconscious divulging of secrets pertaining to the mysteries is that of the poet, Publius Ovidius Naso (43 BC-17AD), better known as Ovid, who, like Socrates, had not been initiated. In his case, the Emperor Augustus, who was an Initiate, mercifully changed the penalty of death into banishment to Tomos on the Euxine. This sudden change from unbounded royal favour to banishment has been a fruitful theme of speculation to classical scholars not initiated into the mysteries either. They have quoted Ovid's own lines to show that it was some great and heinous immorality of the Emperor of which Ovid had become unwillingly cognisant. The inexorable law of the death penalty, always following upon the revelation of any portion of the Mysteries to the profane, was unknown to them. Instead of seeing the amiable and merciful act of the Emperor in its true light they have made it an occasion of traducing his moral character. The poet's own words can be no evidence; because he was not an Initiate, it could not be explained to him in what his offence consisted. 
There have been comparatively modern instances of poets unconsciously revealing in their verses so much of the hidden knowledge as to make even initiates suppose them to be fellow-initiates, and come to talk to them on the subject. This only shows that the sensitive poetical temperament is sometimes so far transported beyond the bounds of ordinary sense as to get glimpses into what has been impressed on the Astral Light; and for other reasons. In the 'Light of Asia', for instance, there are two passages that might make an Initiate of the First Degree think that the author of that work had been initiated himself in the Himalayan Ashrams; but this is not so. 
We The Order know of a similar case that happened about the year 1900 A.D. Here, a young writer wrote a certain book in which appeared one particular sentence which caused one of the Continental Initiates to travel hotfoot to England in order to interview that inspired revealer of a certain very dangerous Principle, and to discover how he obtained the secret knowledge. To his amazement the poet was completely bewildered and did not understand what the Initiate was talking about. Although he was not enlightened, the sequel was most unpleasant to the poet; for the portals of pure inspiration were closed to him henceforth, and he who might have become one of the greatest luminaries the world of fine literature has ever known, sank into an abyss of dreadfulness that does not bear thinking about — except with deepest pity. Another book appeared on the market in the 1930s, and in that book another great secret was unveiled by a traveller in South America, who had stumbled across it there by accident. The fate of that writer was also very unpleasant, and there were no more books from his pen. Fortunately for the Mysteries in neither of the above-mentioned cases has the world in general been able to read the real meaning of these revelations. 
You may wonder why such lapses are possible, and why the unconscious or conscious betrayers of the great secrets should have to be punished. These things however, are not in the hands of earthly judges among the Initiates, but are decided by Forces and Beings in another Realm, and mere mortals cannot claim to know what lies behind such things and tell!! But interference with the profound secrets in any way is always punished if those Great Beings consider it necessary. And this is the reason why the great Teachers have to be so extremely careful in the selection of such Disciples that may eventually be entrusted with the ultimate Secrets. 
The Emperor Julian tried to benefit the world by revealing at least a portion of the Great Mysteries. "There are three in One", he said of the Sun the Central Sun (our Sun) being a precaution of Nature. The first is the Universal Cause of all, Sovereign Good and Perfection; the Second Power is paramount intelligence, having dominion over all reasonable beings; the Third is the visible Sun. The pure energy of Solar Intelligence proceeds from the luminous seat occupied by our Sun in the centre of Heaven, or the centre of our Solar System, that pure energy being the Logos of it. The mysterious word 'Spirit' produces all through the Sun, and it never operates through any other medium, as Hermes Trismegistus declares. For it is in the Sun, more than in any other heavenly body that the unknown Power placed the seat of his habitation. Only neither Hermes nor Julian, nor any other Initiated Occultist meant by this unknown cause 'Jehovah'. They referred to the cause that produced all the manifested 'great Gods', or Demiurgi (the Hebrew God included) of our system. Nor was our visible, material Sun meant, for the latter was only the manifested symbol. Philolaus, the Pythagorean, explains and completes Hermes by saying: "The Sun is a mirror of Fire, the splendour of whose flames by their reflection in that mirror (the Sun) is poured upon us, and that splendour we call image." It is evident that Philolaus referred to the Central Spiritual Sun, whose beams and effulgence are only mirrored by our Central Star, the Sun. This is as clear to the Occultists as it was to the Pythagoreans. 

As for the profane of Pagan Antiquity, it was, of course, the physical Sun that was the 'highest God' for them, as it seems if Chevalier Drach's view be accepted- to have now virtually become for the modern Roman Catholics. If words mean anything, the statement made by Chevalier Drach that "this Sun is, undeniably, the second hypostasis of the Deity," these words imply what we say: for "this Sun" refers to the Kabalistic Sun, and "hypostasis" means substance or subsistence of the Godhead or Trinity distinctly personal. As the author, being an ex-Rabbi, thoroughly versed in Hebrew and in the Mysteries of the Zohar, ought to know the value of words; and moreover, in writing this, he was bent upon reconciling "the seeming contradictions", as he puts it, between Judaism and Christianity — the fact becomes quite evident. 
As the Moon is represented on Earth by the metal silver (and the colour white), the Sun is represented by gold and the colour orange; but the true colour of the Sun is blue, and it appears yellow or orange; only owing to the effect of the absorption of vapours (chiefly metallic) by its atmosphere. Colours in their Esoteric and Exoteric meaning in general and their affinities and connections with Sound and many other things will be discussed later. 
The Sun —though ever, even for the multitudes, "the only and one King and God in Heaven", and "the God of Good Counsel" of Orpheus had in every exoteric and popular religion a dual aspect which was anthropomorphised by the profane. Thus the Sun was 
Ormuzd-Ahriman, Bel-Jupiter and Baal, the life-giving and the death-giving luminary. And thus one and the same monolith, pillar, pyramid, tower or temple, originally built to glorify the First Principle or aspect, might become in time an idol-fane or worse, the "indecent" emblem of the missionaries, like the baalim, chammanim, and the bamoth with the pillars of unhewn stone of the Bible, set up for the glorification of the male Jehovah. But this does not alter the fact that the pureia of the Greeks, the nur-hags of Sardinia, the teocalli of Mexico, etc., were all in the beginning of the same character as the 'Round Towers' of Ireland. They were all sacred places of initiation. 
In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad it says: "Self is the Lord of all things; it is the King of all things; as all the spokes of a wheel are contained in the nave and circumference, all things are contained in this Self". This Self, the highest, the One, and the Universe, was symbolised on the plane of mortals by the Sun, its life-giving effulgence being in its turn the emblem of the soul-killing terrestrial passions which have ever been an impediment to the re-union of the Unit Self (the Spirit) with the All-Self. Hence the allegorical mystery of which only the broad features may be given here. It was enacted by the 'Sons of the Fire-Mist' and of 'Light'. The second Sun (the "second hypostasis" of Rabbi Drach) appeared during the trials of initiation, Vishvakarma, the Hierophant, cutting off seven of his beams, and replacing them with a crown of brambles, when the 'Sun' became Vikarttana, shorn of his beams or rays. After that, the Sun - enacted by a neophyte ready to be initiated - was made to descend into Pātāla, the nether regions, on a trial of Tantalus. Coming out of it triumphant, he emerged from this region of lust and iniquity, to re-become Karmasākshin, witness of the Destiny of men (for Surya, the Sun, is one of the nine Divinities that witness all human actions), and arose once more in all the glory of his regeneration as Gabhastiman, "re-possessed of his rays". You should meditate on this. 
There are (for our present purposes) two Suns, a Sun adored, and a Sun adoring; the Apocalypse proves it. The Word is found in Chapter VII., in the Angel who descends with the rising of the Sun, having the Seal of the living God. While commentators differ on the personality of this Angel, St. Ambrose and many other theologians see in him Christ Himself. But in Chapter XIX, we find an Angel standing in the Sun, inviting all the nations to gather to the supper of the Lamb. This time it is literally and simply the Angel of the Sun who cannot be mistaken for the 'Word', since the prophet distinguishes him from the Word, the King of Kings and the Lord of Lords. The Angel in the Sun seems to be an adoring Sun. Who may the latter be? And who else can he be but the Morning Star, the Guardian Angel of the World, his ferouer, or angel of the face, as the Word is the Angel of the Face (presence) of his Father, his principal attribute and strength, as his name itself implies (Mikael), the powerful rector glorified by the Church, the Rector potens who will fell the Anti-Christ, the Vice-Word, in short, who represents his Master, and seems to be One with him. 
The words: "My God, My Sun, thou hast poured thy radiance upon me" were the final words that concluded the thanksgiving prayer of the Initiate, "the Son and the glorified Elect of the Sun." 

In Egypt we find to this day carvings and paintings that represent the rite. The candidate is between two divine sponsors; one 'Osiris-Sun' with the head of a hawk, representing life, the other Mercury the Ibis-headed, psychopompic genius, who guides the souls after death to their new abode standing for the death of the physical body, figuratively. Both are shown pouring the "stream of life", the waters of purification, on the head of the Initiate, the two streams of which, interlacing form a cross. The better to conceal the truth, this bas-relief has also been explained as a "Pagan presentment of a Christian truth." 
The Chevalier des Mousseaux calls this Mercury: "The assessor of Osiris-Sol, as St. Michael is the assessor, Ferouer, of the Word." The monogram of Chrestos and the Labarum, the standard of Constantine who, by the way, died a Pagan and was never baptised - is a symbol derived from the above rite and also denotes 'Life and Death'. 
Long before the sign of the cross was adopted as a Christian symbol, it was employed as a secret sign of recognition among neophytes and adepts, as you can read in the 'Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie', by Eliphas Levi. 
This Lecture concludes another step forward in this Grade, and if there is anything you wish to write about we shall be glad to hear from you as usual. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
