SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 29. 
1 
Dear Disciple, 
The adult HUMAN BRAIN measures about 61⁄2 inches (167mm) long by about 51⁄2 inches (140mm) wide and about 31⁄2 inches (93mm) in height at the summit of its curve. In an adult man it weighs about 3 lbs (1.4kgs) and contains around 100 billion neurons or individual nerve cells! Yet it has developed, during the course of evolution, from a tiny spot of nerve cell, a quarter the size of a pinhead. Bit by bit, as animals have advanced in complexity, that original speck has grown, divided and become specialised, till the masses of nerve cells, with their connecting strands of dendrons and axons, are so closely packed and interwoven that even by dissection or microscopic examination it is not yet possible to understand all their ramifications and connections. In spite of all that has been learned from research in recent years, the brain contains a large number of unsolved problems. It is strange to reflect upon the constant additions, enlargements and adaptations that have taken place and to realise that we still use the brain of a worm, to which has been added the brain of a fish and then the brain which answers the description of 'wits', which are the same kind of wits as a dog's. In fact we all carry our family tree neatly packed in our craniums, and we not only use all the various stages, but we could not do without them (see end of previous lecture). 
In order to trace this family tree we must go back to the most primitive creature, the Amoeba. If the Amoeba is touched it will draw itself away, and if food is placed near it, the food will be absorbed; these are the only two movements of which it is capable, except the act of dividing itself into two parts, which is its means of propagating its species. At this earliest level it appears to be a sort of chemical reaction or 'tropism' similar to the movements of the heliotrope or flower that turns to the Sun. In this process the whole body of the Amoeba must act as one and all at once. In the course of evolution the single cell passes through various stages of colonies of cells till there are two layers of cells. Later three layers of cells were found necessary and this has formed the basis of the development of all living animals. 
Probably the lowest type of creature based on this three layer system is the earthworm, in which we find a row of bodies connected in line, each of which has its own nerve centre, with streaks radiating to the surface but now differently differentiated into an incoming and outgoing service. The incoming nerves, as we have already seen, arise in a nerve ending under the skin and pass up to the centre, called the ganglion, while their opposite numbers pass out from the same centre to end in muscles which can be contracted or relaxed. Now it is obvious 
that the various bodies or segments of an earthworm must act together or at least in rhythm and also that the foremost segment of the body, that which is literally up against life as the creature moves about, will get most experience of the outer world and so is most fitted to become the leader of the whole. Thus the leading ganglion grows into a larger exchange, receiving stimuli from the outer world through any one of the other segments and providing for teamwork with the ganglia of the hinder segments. This foremost ganglion is the prototype of the human brain. 
The most primitive part of this brain in Man is a diamond-shaped enlargement of the spinal cord (whence its name of Medulla Oblongata) three quarters of an inch (19mm) long and half an inch (13mm) across, which lies just inside the skull, next to the upper end of the spinal column. All nervous impulses coming up the spinal cord pass through it as well as those serving the tongue, throat, ears and the great vagus nerve which is concerned with the regulation of the action of the heart and other organs. Only the nerves of the face, nose and eyes reach the brain without passing through the Medulla. In Man this primitive section still retains its vital importance, for so long as it remains intact human life can carry on- - albeit at a very low level, yet the heart will beat and the lungs continue their breathing. 
The next step forward was when certain patches became specially sensitive to light waves and others to sound waves. The distance receptors had begun; the creature could re-act to things beyond its reach. All this meant more and more incoming nerves, bringing reports to the central exchange in what we may now call the creature's head, and by the time we come to the lobsters an annex has become necessary and nature used up an available space just under the lobster's gullet. This is somewhat of a tragedy from the lobster's point of view, for if he develops too many brain cells it means starvation for him. As it is, he can never live on anything more satisfying than slops! 
When we come to the fishes a great change has taken place and instead of the hard outside coat of the lobster we find the bones inside and the creature has become a vertebrate. In the embryo, whether of trout or man, one of the first differentiations of structure to appear is a groove running nearly the length of the body; soon the ridges of this groove close over, forming a hollow tube, which is the future spinal column. A trout then has a spine like a man, with nerves passing to and fro between the segments of spinal cord and the muscles, and with a large nerve exchange in the head already tending to specialisation and subdivision. We do not know what he thinks about though he most certainly feels. He can also see though he cannot close his eyes. Taste in a trout is a composite sense. The ordinary use of the word denotes chemical stimuli acting upon certain sensitive nerve endings called taste buds at the back of the tongue (smell being a later form of the same sense, adapted to receive and deal with finer air-borne particles, after our ancestors had left the water). Yet a trout has been known to follow a trail of scent through water he could probably taste it. Just how he hears is more of a problem. His ear contains varying senses for the receipt of sound waves within certain limits. Fishermen know that they may stand on a bank and shout without disturbing the fish, but one step forward and the fish will be gone in a flash, which seems as though they heard by vibration. 

Fishes, not being restricted to life on the flat plane of earth, carry about with them a beautiful piece of mechanism by means of which they can preserve their sense of direction and position in the water. This consists of a row of receptor patches along either side which is called the lateral line sense; it is sensitive to vibration, and this is how a trout would seem to hear. In mammals this sense is still present, but has been modified until only the foremost patch exists and this is now housed within the ear and its apparatus the labyrinth and semi-circular canals which are close in anatomical relationship to the true hearing receptors of the human ear. Survivals of this vibratory sense may be recognised in the rabbit who stamps his hind leg as a danger signal to the warren and in the teacher of a deaf mute class who stamps her foot to gain the attention of the class. The sense of poise still does its part in the service of balance, and the fact that balance is felt in the ears can be testified by anyone who has suffered aural reactions in seasickness. 
If fishes can hear, see and savour they should be well on the path of evolution and they have a vast field in the ocean. The trouble is that their powers of response are limited. They can advance or retreat but their body must act as a whole and all at once and they can only make one response at a time. Even in Man, the number and variety of incoming stimuli far exceed the possibility of appropriate action, which leaves good scope for further evolution! To remedy this, the higher fishes begin to throw out branch offices which are made possible by the development of the skull. Once the spinal cord enters the skull it is free from the close protection of the vertebrae and the nerve fibres have room to expand. Extensions are pushed out wherever there is room for them, and the old simple apparatus is superceded by newer and more delicate contrivances. But the old machinery is not scrapped, but continues to carry on the routine work. This power still exists in Man, but in a somewhat lessened form because the newer parts are so numerous and complicated that it becomes increasingly difficult for the old brain to provide passable substitutes. 
There is one department which first developed in the higher fishes and which never afterwards alters its position or function (although it may be larger or smaller). This is the CEREBELLUM or little brain, which lies at the extreme back of the head and in Man can be seen under the mass of the Cerebrum, like a bun of hair under a woman's hat. Cables of nerve fibres push upwards and slightly backwards from the medulla and then spread out into a mass of nerve cells and short connecting links. Cut through the centre of the Cerebellum from back to front and it looks somewhat like a cauliflower. It is the part of the brain in charge of teamwork between the muscles; it is the second great compartment of the brain and may be thought of as the 'balance' brain. The semi-circular canals of the ear keep the body poised in space, while the cerebellum, with which they are directly connected, controls movement through space. 
A trout is well adapted for the life he has to lead and his environment has remained stationary, but the path of many creatures has not been so smooth. Many have been faced by a series of crises when it meant death or a change of habit. One of these occurred when the waters retreated and left the land high and dry. The amphibians solved this problem by being fish half their lives as tadpoles, and then taking to the land and developing new and wonderful capacities, the benefits of which we reap to this day. The early amphibians are unknown except to Zoologists, but the frog is not very far up the scale and yet he has a brain built on similar lines to Man, the difference now being in size and the proportion between the different levels. The lateral line sense, the string of receptor nerves which gave the fish a sense of position in water, did not develop further but deteriorated, but instead of fins moving rhythmically in water, there were now four limbs, each of them provided with joints that could be bent or extended and although these limbs usually work in pairs, it was possible for each one to move by itself. This involved more nerves to control movement, and as the senses were receiving more stimuli, something had to be done about it. 
The spinal cord does not end in the Medulla but continues to a point about level with the ear-holes. At this point the nerve cables spread out in all directions, making the anatomy of this part of the brain very intricate, yet it is from the outgrowths of these segments that the brains of all higher creatures have developed. They have grown bit by bit till the skull is closely packed with nerve cells, but this apparently complicated system is, in reality, built up of variations upon a single theme - a neuron, receiving messages by its axon and relaying them to other nerves by its dendron. Incoming and outgoing nerves never communicate directly, but in the brain the connecting neurons run into millions, grouped into exchanges, each of which is directly or indirectly linked up with all the others. Besides this there are small exchanges along the outside of the spine and large ones in the interior of the body. These are called Ganglia, while the exchanges in the higher levels of the brain are expanded into what is called the Cortex or covering, which in Man literally covers the whole of the rest of the brain. These ultimate connecting neurons are called cortical cells. 
The first specialised exchanges were those for smell, sight and hearing, formed by cables pushing forward from the Medulla and then spreading out to form what we call the Midbrain or mesencephalon. The whole of the Midbrain in Man is less than an inch (25mm) long and its functions limited to such things as contracting the pupil of an eye. The Midbrain also connects with the hypothalemus which forms the junction for the autonomic (sympathetic) nerves of the stomach and all internal organs which here find contact with the main cables, so that above this level nothing escapes their influence. 
Beyond the Midbrain lies another section, the interbrain or diencephalon, which consists of twin bodies, in size and appearance like a pair of shelled Brazil nuts which lie astride the central line of the head, just above the ear-holes. Each is closely linked with a similar body lying on its outer side, which from its striped appearance is called the Corpus Striatum and between them, these four little organs form the chief nervous centre for animal brains immediately above the fishes. 
The Thalamus forms the last and largest compartment of the old brain and actually plays a most important part in the thinking machine of intelligent Man. No impulse can reach or leave the New Brain without passing through it, and recent research tends to show that it is here we must look for the driving forces of personality. 
(You will realise that the 'driving forces of personality' mentioned above refers to the Lower Mind with all its appetites and principles of intelligence of a material order. Always bear this in mind; in order to avoid confusion.) 
This subject will be concluded next week. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
