SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 31. 

Dear Disciple, 
In this and the next lecture we shall discuss some of the philosophical aspects of Alchemy. 
What is Alchemy? 
Goethe said once that: "if you wish a wise answer you must put a rational question". This is a true dictum. But not all rational questions receive wise answers; and this is especially true when you ask an intellectual person "What is Alchemy?" 
They cannot give a rational answer, for they do not know. Some put it down to quackery of the worst kind (too often true enough); others say it is or was but ignorant superstition (also often true); still others shrug their shoulders and say that they have no time for all this fantastic balderdash. We are afraid that we can but sympathise with all the three above-mentioned classes of people.....up to a point. 
The reason why we make this statement is that there are so many books on Alchemy to be found, both old and new, that can tell you nothing whatsoever about the subject, that it is an almost hopeless task for the average enquirer to obtain rational information about the true nature of Alchemy. 

Besides - the subject in itself is so vast and varied in its many different aspects that there is no book known to us that deals with it in its entirety. We shall have to tell you a very great deal about both Magic and Alchemy in the future, and you will get an entirely different realisation in time of what both really were and are. Both subjects reach the very greatest depths of profundity in Occultism, as well as the most elevated and sublime heights; for in Magic and Alchemy - considered in their true natures lie hidden almost all the Secrets of the Universe of Gods and men. 

In an old Syriac manuscript, translated by the alchemist Malchus in the 15th century, there appears the following passage, connected with Simon Magus; "Simon, laying his face upon the ground, whispered in her ear 'O Mother Earth, give me, I pray thee, some of thy breath; and I will give thee mine; let me loose, O Mother, that I may carry thy words to the stars, and I will faithfully return to thee after a while'. And the Earth strengthening her status, none to her detriment, sent her genius to breathe of her breath on Simon, while he breathed on her; and the stars rejoiced to be visited by the Mighty One". 
Now before you read any further, ponder for a few minutes over this passage, and see what you can make of it. Reading it just as it stands makes very little sense; does it not? The same applies to every manuscript or book on Magic and Alchemy of the olden times. The true meaning is hidden and entirely concealed from the man who does not possess the key to the enigmatical writings. 
Now after you have thought the matter over for a while — let us try to discover to what the writer was really referring. You have all heard of the term 'levitation', which, by the way, is something that can be achieved by a great many people if they wish to train for it and know the secret. The Greeks had a word for it and called it Aethrobacy (from the Greek 'Aithrobates'), which meant 'walking or being lifted in the air'. The spiritualistic medium Daniel Dunglas Home (1833-1886) was credited with being able to do this, and we have no doubts that he did. This faculty may be either conscious or unconscious; in the first instance it comes under the heading of Magic; in the second it is either a disease or a power which requires a few words of elucidation. 
The allegorical passage alluding to Simon Magus has a deep meaning, and it refers to the recognised electro-chemical (or alchemical) principle that bodies similarly electrified repel each other, while those differently electrified attract one another mutually. 
Professor Cooke said in connection with this principle: "The most elementary knowledge of chemistry shows that while radicals of opposite natures combine most eagerly together, two metals, or two closely allied metalloids, show but little affinity to each other". 

The Earth is a magnetic body; in fact, as some Scientists have found, it is one vast magnet, as Paracelsus affirmed over 500 years ago. It is charged with one form of electricity - we may call it positive which it evolves continually by spontaneous action, in its interior....or centre of motion. Human bodies, in common with all other forms of matter, are charged (as a whole) with the opposite form of electricity — negative. That is to say, organic or inorganic bodies, if left to themselves, will constantly and involuntarily charge themselves with, and evolve the form of electricity opposed to that of the Earth itself. 
Now, what is weight? Simply the attraction of the Earth. In "The Sun and the Earth' Professor Stewart has explained that: "Without the attractions of the earth you could have no weight, and if 
you had an earth twice as heavy as this, you would have double the attraction". How can we get rid of this attraction? According to the electrical law stated above there is an attraction between our Globe and the organisms upon it, which holds them upon the surface of the ground. But the 'Law of Gravitation' has been counteracted in many instances, by the levitation of persons and inanimate objects; how account for this? The condition of our physical systems is largely dependent upon the action of our will, as theurgic philosophy teaches. If well regulated, it can produce 'miracles'; among others a change of this electrical polarity from negative to positive; the man's relations with the 'earth-magnet' would then become repellent, and 'gravity' or attraction would have ceased to exist for him. It would then be as natural for him to rush into the air until the repellent force had exhausted itself, as, before it had been for him to remain upon the ground. The altitude of his elevation would be measured by his ability, greater or less, to charge his body with positive electricity. This control over the physical forces once obtained, alteration of his levity or gravity would be as easy as breathing. Here, then, we have an explanation of the allegory of Simon Magus; all very nice and simple, is it not? You only have to know what is meant by the enigmatic writings! 
We stated above that this 'levitation' could also be caused by some disorder. The study of nervous diseases has established that even in ordinary somnambulism, as well as in hypnotised subjects, the weight of the body seems to be diminished. In the 19th century Professor Perty mentioned a somnambulist by the name of Koehler, who, when in water, could not sink, but floated. The Seeress of Prevorst rose to the surface of her bath and could not be kept seated in it. There is the case of Anna Fleisher, who, being subject to epileptic fits, was often seen by the Superintendent to rise in the air; and was once, in the presence of two trustworthy witnesses (two deans) and others, raised seven feet from her bed in a horizontal position. The similar case of Margaret Rule is cited by Upham in his 'History of Salem Witchcraft'. Professor Perty also stated that; "In ecstatic subjects the rising in the air occurs much more frequently than with somnambulists. We are so accustomed to consider gravitation as being a something absolute and unalterable, that the idea of a complete or partial rising in opposition to it seems inadmissible; nevertheless, there are phenomena in which, by means of material forces, gravitation is overcome. In several diseases - as, for instance, nervous fever the weight of the human body seems to be increased, but in all ecstatic conditions to be diminished. And there may, likewise, be other forces than material ones which can counteract this power". 
In a Madrid Journal, 'El Criterio Espiritista', towards the end of the 19th century, there appeared a report about a young peasant girl near Santiago, in which it is stated that: "Two bars of magnetised iron held over her horizontally, half a metre distant, was sufficient to suspend her body in the air". 
The word 'Alchemy' is derived from Al and Chemi, or fire, or the God and patriarch, and Kam or Khem, which is the ancient name of Egypt as well. The Mystics in the middle ages, such as Robert Fludd, Paracelsus, Thomas Vaughan (Eugenuis Philalethes), van Helmont and so on, were all Alchemists who searched for the hidden spirit in every inorganic matter. It is all very well to accuse these men of being charlatans and false pretenders, but surely, such men as Roger Bacon, Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa, Henry Kunrath, and the Arabian Geber (who was the first to introduce into Europe some of the secrets of chemistry), can hardly be treated as imposters, and least of all as fools. 
Scientists who are reforming the Science of Physics upon the basis of the atomic theory of Democritus, as restated by John Dalton, no matter how this science has developed since Dalton's days, conveniently forget that Democritus of Abdera was an Alchemist, and that the mind that was capable of penetrating so far into the secret operations of nature in one direction must have had good reasons to study and become a Hermetic Philosopher. 
Olaus Borrichias says that the cradle of Alchemy is to be sought in the most distant times. Paracelsus made a most significant statement when he said: "The stars attract from us to themselves, and we again from them to us. The body is wood and the life is fire, which comes like the light from the stars and from heaven. Magic is the Philosophy of Alchemy". 
Everything pertaining to the spiritual world must come to us through the stars, and if we are in friendship with them, or attuned to their radiations, we may attain the greatest magical effects. The human body is subjected, as well as the earth, and planets, and stars, to a double law; it attracts and repels, for it is saturated through with double magnetism, the influx of the astral light. Everything is double in nature; magnetism is positive and negative, active and passive, male and female. Night rests humanity from the day's activity, and restores the equilibrium of human as well as of Cosmic nature. He who has learnt the grand secret of polarising the action and endowing his magnetic fluid with a bisexual force, will have become the greatest magician living. This was the great secret of the ancient Hierophants.... 
but it has not been forgotten; nay, it has remained the secret of a chosen few, who will release it in time to those who have been found worthy. Equilibrium is the resultant of two opposing forces, eternally reacting upon each other; and this is the property of Astral Light. The result of it is Life. But when the two forces are expanded and remain inactive for a time, so as to equal one another, thus coming to a complete rest, the condition is physical death.  
The Brahmānical expression "to stir up the Brahmā” jinvati - means to stir up the power which lies latent at the bottom of certain magical operations, and the Vedic sacrifices are but ceremonial magic. This power is the occult electricity, or Akāsa; it is the alkahest of the alchemists in one sense, or the universal solvent, the same anima mundi as the astral light. 

The ancients were always distinguished especially the Chaldean astrologers and Magians - for their ardent love and pursuit of knowledge in every branch of Science. They tried to penetrate the secrets of nature in the same way as our modern naturalists, and by the only method by which this object can be obtained: by experimental researches and reason. As chemists or alchemists they were unequalled, and in his famous lecture on "The lost Arts", Wendell Philips says: "The chemistry of the most ancient period had reached a point which we never even approached". The secrets of the malleable glass, which, “If supported by one end by its own weight, in twenty hours dwindles down to a fine line that you can curve around your wrist, would be as difficult to rediscover in our civilised countries as to fly to the Moon". 
The fabrication of a cup of glass which was brought by an exile to Rome in the reign of Tiberius, a cup "which he dashed upon the marble pavement, and it was not crushed or broken by the fall", and which, as it got "dented some" was easily brought into shape again with a hammer, is a historic fact. If it is doubted now it is merely because the moderns cannot do the same. And yet, in Samarkand and some of the Monasteries of Tibet, such cups and glassware may be found to this day; nay, there are persons who claim that they can make the same by virtue of their knowledge of the much-ridiculed and ever-doubted alkahest - the universal solvent of the alchemists. 
Next week we shall continue this subject. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
