SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 35. 

Dear Disciple, 
In Xenophon's 'Memorabilia of Socrates' he states that the latter advised his followers that it was proper that a well-educated man should be versed in any department of knowledge. One should have an understanding of all the arts and sciences without becoming a slave to any. He said with regard to the study of Geometry, for instance, that it was hard to understand what profit was to be had out of pursuing the study of diagrams difficult to understand, and he remarked that they were enough to consume a man's whole life, and hindering him from attaining any other valuable branches of knowledge. This teaching is only too true. You will probably know yourself that there are many people who devote their whole life to one subject only. There are musicians who can talk about nothing but music, painters who are completely ignorant, or almost so, of anything but their art, and sculptors likewise. This makes for one-sidedness, and is completely wrong of course. It is necessary that one has a wide outlook on life, and knows at least something of all the realms of nature, art, and all the rest of the material world in which we are imprisoned for a while. This, then, is the reason why we touch upon so many different subjects in our studies; not because we fear that you personally are ignorant of all these things, but because we must present you with a panorama of life as complete as possible in its broad outlines. There is no harm in having one particular pet subject, and in this age of ignorant specialisation it is almost unavoidable, but we should not neglect the rest of the scheme for the sake of only one detail, no matter how expert we may be in that particular sideline, even if it looms upon the horizon of all our thinking continually and seems to be the only thing that matters. Having made our purpose a little clearer we must now return to our consideration of the 'Arts'. 
Wendell Philips says: "We seem to imagine that whether knowledge will die with us or not, it certainly began with us. We have a pitying estimate, a tender pity for the narrowness, ignorance and darkness of the bygone ages". 
There have been learned writers, such as Professor Albrecht Muller, who in 'The First Traces of Man in Europe', talks of peoples as if they had just emerged from the bronze age into the succeeding age of iron, when he says: "And this bronze age reaches to and overlaps the beginning of the historic period in some countries, and so includes the great epochs of the Assyrian and Egyptian Empires, B.C. circa 1500, and the earlier eras of the next succeeding age of iron". (!!) What is one to think of such 'authorities'? 
Yet, in Dr. Draper's 'Conflict between Religion and Science', Chapter 1, we see an entirely different picture unfold itself before our eyes when we read: "If Chaldea, Assyria and Babylon presented stupendous and venerable antiquities reaching far back into the night of time, Persia was not without her wonders of a later date. The pillared halls of Persepolis were filled with miracles of art carvings, sculptures, enamels and colossal bulls. Ecbatana, in Media, the cool summer retreat of the Persian Kings, was defended by seven encircling walls of hewn and polished blocks, the interior ones in succession of increasing height, and of different colours, in astrological accordance with the seven planets. The palace was roofed with silver tiles; its beams were plated with gold. At midnight, in its halls, the Sun was rivalled by many a row of naphtha cressets. A paradise, that luxury of the monarchs of the East, was planted in the midst of the city. The Persian Empire was truly the garden of the world....In Babylon there still remained its walls, once more than sixty miles in compass, and, after the ravages of three centuries and three conquerors, still more than eighty feet in height; there were still the ruins of the temple of the cloud-encompassed Bel; on its top was planted its observatory wherein the weird Chaldean astronomers had held nocturnal communion with the stars; still there were vestiges of the two palaces with their hanging gardens, in which were trees growing in mid air, and the wreck of the hydraulic machinery that had supplied them from the river. Into the artificial lake, with its vast apparatus of aqueducts and sluices, the melted snows of the Armenian mountains found their way and were confined in their course to the city by the embankments of the Euphrates. Most wonderful of all, perhaps, was the tunnel under the riverbed". 
And you who read this may once have lived amidst these surroundings! 
The Ancient Egyptians knew all the ornamental arts. Their jewellery of gold, silver and precious stones are beautifully wrought; so was the cutting, polishing and setting of them executed by their lapidaries in the finest style. An Egyptian ring from the hand of a mummy was pronounced the most artistic piece of jewellery in the London Exhibition of 1851. Their imitation of precious stones in glass is far above anything done today; and the emerald may be said to have been imitated to perfection. Their glass lotus-cups were ideals of grace, and blended in the most exquisite colours, and we ourselves have seen many examples of these at sales and in museums. If you do not have access to the collections in the great museums, you can find many fine photographs of these beautiful objects in The Jewels of the Pharaohs by Cyril Aldred (Jewels of the Pharaohs: Egyptian Jewelry of the Dynastic Period by Cyril Aldred. Thames & Hudson, London, 1971), though we cannot say that we agree with all the author's speculations regarding the manufacture of these jewels! When King Tutankhamen's tomb was opened in 1922 there issued from it such a store of sublime treasures, that the world gasped with astonishment. In the spring of 1939 the silver trumpet of this king was sounded in Cairo Museum and broadcast to the world by the BBC. At the first attempt, the silver trumpet was shattered but it was restored immediately and survived the eventual broadcast. As if the dark powers accepted the challenge, the greatest war in recorded history broke out in the same year. 
In Pompeii there was discovered a room full of glass; there was ground-glass, window-glass, cut-glass and coloured glass of every variety. 
Catholic priests who forced their way into China over 300 years ago, were shown a glass, transparent and colourless, which was filled with liquor made by the Chinese, and which appeared to be colourless also, like pure water. This liquor was poured into the glass, and then looking through, it seemed to be filled with fishes. They turned it out and repeated the experiment, and again it was filled with fishes. 
There was the celebrated vase in Genoa Cathedral which was considered to be a solid emerald for many centuries. The Roman Catholic legend claimed that it was one of the treasures that the Queen Sheba gave to Solomon, and that it was the identical cup out of which the Saviour drank at the Last Supper. Subsequently it was found not to be an emerald, but an imitation; and when Napoleon brought it to Paris and gave it to the Institute, the Scientists were obliged to confess that it was not a stone, and that they could not tell of what it was made. 
When the English plundered the Summer Palace of the Emperor of China, the European artists were surprised at seeing the curiously- wrought metal vessels of every kind, far exceeding all the boasted skill of the workmen of Europe. 
African tribes in the interior of the country gave travellers better razors than they had themselves. 
A native in Calcutta was seen to throw a handful of silk floss into the air, cutting it into pieces with his sabre of native steel. This steel was examined and described as "the greatest triumph of metallurgy, and metallurgy is the glory of chemistry". 
Many of the precious stones mentioned in the Bible are only found at very great depths, but have scientists ever ascertained the precise time when mining-shafts were first sunk by mankind? 
The arts of the goldsmith and lapidary have been practised from an unknown antiquity in India and elsewhere. That the Egyptians either knew from the remotest ages how to temper steel, or possessed something still better and more perfect than the implement necessary in our days for chiselling, is an alternative from which the archaeologists cannot escape no matter how many wild theories they formulate to explain away their difficulties. How else could the Egyptians have produced such artistic chiselling, or wrought such exquisite sculptures as they did? Among the treasures discovered in King Tutankhamen's tomb was an iron dagger as well as a set of 16 small iron chisels, which showed no sign of rust after more than 3,000 Years! Modern investigators admit they do not know how these objects were forged. If you ever visit the British Museum, in London, just place your hand on the knee of any of the seated Egyptian statues (provided the attendant is not lurking in a dark corner ready to pounce on you) and feel all the bones and sinews inside it, then slide your hand slowly down the leg and feel all the hidden muscles. It is just as if you are touching your own leg, and the sensation you get is that it lives and that every inner detail is there; yet, to the average eye these limbs seem to be all 'straight up and down'! 
In the writings of Vitruvius Pollio, of the Augustan age, you may read that architecture, with all its rules of proportion, was anciently taught at initiations, in other words, in the Mystery Schools; for it was considered necessary by the Hierophants that the Disciples should acquaint themselves with this truly divine art, and learn to understand the deep esoteric significance hidden in every rule and law of proportion. 
The Jewish system of sacred measures (which Moses had learnt in Egypt and passed on to them), applied to religious symbols, is the same so far as geometrical and numerical combinations go, as those of Greece and Chaldea. And the Mosaic Books were intended, by a mode of art-speech, to set forth a geometrical and numerical system of exact science, which should serve as an origin of measures. 
The integral ratio of the diameter to the circumference of a circle is 6561 for diameter, and 20612 for circumference. This geometrical ratio was the very ancient and probably the divine origin of what have now become, through exoteric handling and practical application, the British linear measures, the underlying unit of which, viz., the inch, was likewise the base of one of the royal Egyptian cubits, and of the Roman foot. There was also a modified ratio, viz., 113 to 355; and that while this last ratio pointed through its origin to the exact integral pi (л), or 6561 to 20612, it also served as a base for astronomical calculations. A system of exact science, geometrical, numerical and astronomical, founded on these ratios, and to be seen in use in the construction of the Great Egyptian Pyramid, was in part the burden of this art-speech, as contained in, and concealed under, the verbiage of the Hebrew text of the Bible. The inch and the two-foot rule of 24 inches, interpreted for use through the elements of the circle and the ratios mentioned, were found to be at the basis or foundation of this natural, and Egyptian, and Hebrew system of science; while, moreover, it seems evident enough that the system itself was looked upon as of divine origin, and of divine revelation. 
Derived from the Atlanteans the ancients had among other arts and sciences those of Astronomy and Symbolism, which included the knowledge of the Zodiac; and the whole of antiquity believed, with good reason, that humanity and its races are all intimately connected with the Planets, and these with the Zodiacal signs. The whole world's history is recorded in the latter. In the ancient temples of Egypt there is an example in the Zodiac of Dendera; but with the exception of an Arabic work there seems to be no correct copy of these marvellous records of the past and also of the future history of our Globe. If you can obtain a copy of Denon's 'Travels in Egypt', you will find in Vol.2 reproductions of two famous Egyptian Zodiacs. Images of these two Zodiacs can also now be found on the Internet, as well as in several modern books on Ancient Egyptian Science and Astronomy by authors such as John Anthony West ('Serpent in the Sky') and R.A. Schwaller de Lubicz ("The Temple of Man'). The assertion of the Egyptian priests to Herodotus, that the terrestrial Pole and the Pole of the Ecliptic had formerly coincided, has been corroborated by Mackie, who states that the Poles are represented on the Zodiacs in both positions. 
He who has studied the ancient classics and traditions really deeply must inevitably come to the conclusion. even if he knows nothing of Occult secret history- that the Arts and Sciences known to those whom we now call 'the Ancients', were not the achievements of any of the now or even then existing nations, nor of any of the historical peoples of Asia, and that, notwithstanding the learning of the Hindus, their undeniable priority in the early part of their race has to be referred to a people or a race still more ancient and more learned than were even the Brahmans themselves. This was the belief of Bailly (Histoire de l'Astronomie Ancienne) and Voltaire, the greatest sceptic of his day, the materialist par excellence, shared Bailly's belief. He considered that "Long before the Empires of China and India, there had been nations cultured, learned, and powerful, which a deluge of barbarians overpowered and thus replunged into their primitive state of ignorance and savagery, or what they call the state of pure nature”. (Lettres sur l'Atlantide, pp.15). But this conjecture is only a half-guess. There were such "deluges of barbarians" in the Fifth Race. With regard to the Fourth Race, it was a bona fide deluge of water which swept it away. But neither Voltaire nor Bailly knew aught of the secret teachings of the East. 
Next week we shall continue this fascinating subject. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
