SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 33. 

Dear Disciple, 
There is no organic life in the material world without the flowing of some nutritive and purifying fluid, carrying the elements required for growth and development, and for transporting from them the waste products which, if allowed to remain, would hamper and poison the cells. In the animal world, this vital fluid is the BLOOD. It is the very essence of life, and if good health is to be enjoyed, a good blood supply is an absolute essential. 
The main chemical characters of this marvellous fluid depend on the digestion, on the respiration and on the cellular activity of the various tissues of the body; its currents are originated chiefly in the heart, without which it would be as useless as a stagnant pool. The heart beats an average of 70 beats per minute (depending on age). At this rate it beats more than 100,000 times per day and 36 million times per year. 
The quality of the blood circulating through the body exercises a material influence upon every tissue, of which it is composed. If the blood exhibits grave alterations in its constitution, either of a temporary or of a more permanent nature, the brain is bound to suffer along with every other organ. Its functions, to be perfectly carried out, demand a full supply of pure well-oxygenated blood, a condition which, in its turn, depends on an adequate supply of nutritious food and on the breathing of pure air. 
The principal uses of the blood are: 
1. To carry oxygen, water and other nutritives to the tissues of the body. 
2. To remove carbonic acid gas, urea and other waste materials. 
3. To distribute heat throughout the body and help in other ways to regulate the body temperature. 
4. To carry the excretions of the thyroid, the suprarenal and other glands to the places where they are needed. 
5. To assist in protecting the body from the attacks of micro- organisms. 
Blood is manufactured from the food, in the marrow of our bones, in the lymphatic glands of our bodies and in the spleen. Diseased states quickly re-act on the general composition of the blood and the changes noted serve as a guide to the nature of the disease. Blood can be drawn from the skin and the number and percentage of cells, normal and abnormal, can be counted and the percentage of the red matter contained in them can be estimated. Some diseases cannot be diagnosed in any other way. 
The amount of blood in the human body is estimated at about one twelfth of the total body weight. The average individual has from 10 to 14 pints (5 to 6 litres) which take less than one minute to circulate through the 60,000 miles (96,558 km) of blood vessels which network the body: this is nearly 1,500 times per day. Blood has a slightly salty taste and a faint and distinctive odour; it ranges in temperature from 37°C (98°F) on the surface of the body to 38°C (100°F) in the deep veins. The heat is produced by the chemical action of the oxygen on the various tissues of the body. There will be no need 
to we hope remind you that Science is wrong here. The heat of the body is supplied by the Vital Spark mainly, and the Vital Spark belongs in reality to the Astral Body, which is interwoven so to speak - with the physical body until the two are separated at 'death', better termed 'translation', for that is what it is. 
 
People often speak of the acid state of their blood, but if this were true they would die forthwith. Actually the blood is alkaline, never acid, although its degree of alkalinity varies from time to time. 
It is not a simple fluid, but an extremely complex mixture. There is a liquid matrix called the plasma in which the formed elements are suspended; this comprises about 55% of the blood, while the substances make up the balance. The formed elements are 'erythrocytes' (red blood cells or RBCs); 'leukocytes' (white blood cells or WBCs); and 'thrombocytes' (blood platelets). Plasma is a straw coloured watery fluid composed of 92% water and 8% solid materials. It contains a wide variety of inorganic substances (calcium, potassium, magnesium, chloride, bicarbonate, phosphate and sulphate) together with organic proteins such as albumin, globulins and fibrinogen; these latter serve as nutrients. Also found in the plasma are various end products of digestion such as amino acids, glucose, neutral fats, urea, and the lipid cholesterol. It also contains oxygen, nitrogen and carbon dioxide. 
The redness of the blood is due to the fact that there are millions upon millions of tiny round bodies, like coins, floating in it. At least they appear to be like coins under the microscope, but when in the body they are probably spherical in shape the same as all cells throughout nature. These are the red blood cells (RBCs). There is reason to think that the RBCs are old cells, for they lack a nucleus the nerve-speck, which is found in every living cell. At the beginning, all RBCs possess a nucleus, but they lose this before they begin their active work. Only in emergencies are the young nucleated cells called into use, as for instance, after haemorrhage. In this case, RBCs, not yet fully developed, are forced into the service of the body. 
In ordinary circumstances an RBC begins its life, and remains until mature, in the red marrow of the bones. When it actually begins work it is full of a substance known as haemoglobin, which gives the cell its peculiar hue and makes the blood red. Haemoglobin possesses the power of gathering in to itself an immense quantity of oxygen, and also of parting again, very easily, with its oxygen store. Its function in the body is to collect oxygen (and other unknown properties from the lungs) and carry these to all the millions of cells of which the body is made up. An RBC also helps to carry away a small portion of the poisonous gas which the cells have breathed out from their substances. When carrying oxygen the blood is bright red; when carrying carbonic acid gas it is purple. 
For the maintenance of strength of mind and body, a full, free supply of oxygen is essential. The red pigment of the blood (haemoglobin) is the most perfect means of achieving this end. Iron is one of the most important items found in blood; it is a component of haemoglobin and for this reason it is almost invariably prescribed in those states of blood disorder known as anaemia. The average 'life' of an RBC, after it begins its work, is between three and four months (science is not sure of the exact life-span); at the end of this period it passes to the spleen and is destroyed. 
The leukocytes or white blood cells (WBCs) are far fewer in number than RBCs, the proportion being about 8,000 white to every 5,000,000 red, or, roughly 1 to 600. Among their activities is the defence of the body against disease germs, the control of repair work after wounds, and they attack practically anything foreign to the system. When the body is attacked by certain disease germs the blood becomes rapidly supercharged with WBCs. The normal number of these cells is doubled at once and goes on increasing until vast armies of them are present. This is spoken of as leukocytosis. 
These WBCs attack disease germs and, if possible, eat them up, for which reason they are spoken of as 'eating cells' or phagocytes (from the Greek words phagein and kutos). What happens is this. The cells, on approaching the disease germ, first extrude arms of protoplasm, called pseudopodia. These grasp and surround their victim, thus incorporating it in themselves. As soon as the fragment has been ingested a small clear space or vacuole appears round it. This contains a colourless digestive fluid which is definitely acid in re-action and which acts on the material by digesting it gradually. Occasionally fractions of the foreign body resist this digestion and so are cast off by the cell. Phagocytes also surround and digest such foreign bodies as dust particles in the lungs or the extravasated blood of a bruise, and are essential in the moulding of bones. These cells produce secretions which protect against and cure disease, and they play an important part in immunity. 
In addition to the RBCs and WBCs, the blood contains minute bodies known as platelets which are small fragments of larger cells (megakaryocytes) produced in the red bone marrow. These are transparent and are smaller in size than an RBC. They play a part in stopping bleeding after injury, and are thus connected with the phenomenon of clotting. If a drop of blood is drawn, by the prick of a needle, and placed on a microscopic slide it is seen to be perfectly fluid, but after a few minutes it becomes thick and jelly-like and will not flow along the slide when inclined. The explanation for this is as follows: 
When the platelets in the blood are either exposed to air or come into contact with rough surfaces such as those caused by wounds, large numbers of them disintegrate. In this process they release granules which react with several blood proteins and calcium, both of which are always present in the blood, producing a substance called active thromboplastin (Also called thrombokinase, etc). By means of a complex process this latter compound combines with prothrombin (another globular protein in blood), calcium and other blood proteins, to form thrombin (also called thrombase), which has the power of clotting blood by changing fibrinogen (yet another soluble protein always present), into fibrin a solid. The fibrin threads become matted together and hold the cells in their meshes, while they squeeze out the fluid on to the surface. In a state of health the blood never clots while in the blood vessels, but if these become diseased or roughened there is danger of portions of clot being floated off into circulation and getting into parts where they may cause considerable damage. 
The blood in the course of its circulation traverses three varieties of blood vessels, as it leaves the left side of the heart it enters the arteries, which convey it to the tissues; in the tissues it passes through very minute vessels called capillaries and then returns to the right side of the heart by means of the veins. By this time it has become dark coloured and is sent through the lungs from whence it emerges bright red and ready to start off again from the left side of the heart for the next round. Arterial blood is fresh, pure and ready for work, while venous blood is used up and full of impurities. The polarity of the blood when it leaves the lungs and passes through the heart on its way through the body is positive, but negative when it returns through the veins on its way back to the lungs via the heart. 
There is a persistence in the flow of the blood as it passes out into circulation from the back and left side of the heart, and a persistence as it returns to the right and the front. This is due to the positive and negative attraction, when the blood is positive it is attracted to the negative and vice versa. This electric and magnetic action has a great deal to do with the action of the heart pumping. It is interesting to note that when the blood leaves the lungs, apart from being oxygenated, it vibrates with a force or energy it did not have before and is positive, whereas oxygen alone is a negative element. 
You probably realise that water can be manufactured, but the product obtained would be similar to distilled water and if you attempted to live on this for any length of time the services of the undertaker would soon be necessary. Water is a 'living' substance and the laboratory cannot add the 'life' essences to their productions. Many similar properties are to be found in the air, which the blood collects, apart from oxygen and these are combined with the more material matter collected from food. 
The blood is the great 'River of Life' and in the action of the air upon the blood stream we have another demonstration of 'the Spirit brooding over the face of the waters' - the great principle of Father-Mother God - the union of positive and negative forces with life made manifest. 
We have seen that the blood is the great collector, transmuter, distributor and protector of life and if the blood is kept in a normal condition, as intended by nature, disease will not enter any part of the body—or at least, could not remain and develop within the body. 
The symbol of blood has been much used by various religions down through the ages, and we hope you have been able to grasp, not only the exoteric significance but, the esoteric meaning that lies behind it. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
