SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 32. 

Dear Disciple, 

Both Paracelsus and van Helmont, as well as a host of other alchemists, maintained that the universal solvent the alkahest was a certain fluid in nature, "capable of reducing all sublunary bodies, as well as homogeneous and mixed, into their ens primum, or the original matter of which they are composed; or into an uniform, equable, and potable liquor, that will unite with water, and the juices of all bodies, and yet retain its own radical virtues; and, if again mixed with itself will thereby be converted into pure elementary water." 
There is no valid reason why this statement should be doubted; for surely it may be conceived without any great effort of imagination that all bodies must have come originally from some first matter, and that this matter according to the lessons of astronomy, geology and physics, must have been a fluid. Why should not gold have been first of all a primitive or basic matter of gold, a ponderous fluid which, as van Helmont says: "from its own nature, or a strong cohesion between its particles, acquired afterward a solid form.” 
Gold: Symbol; Au (aurum); atomic number: 79; atomic weight: 196.9; density: 19.32 g/cm3; hardness: 2.5-3.3; melting point: 1,064°C; boiling point: 2,860°C; is a yellow metal the colour is markedly affected by the presence of traces of other metals very malleable and ductile, and soft- although the softness is counteracted when desired by the addition of other metals. It is not attacked by air, water or hydrogen sulphide, not dissolved by hydrochloric or nitric acid, but soluble in aqua regia (also called nitro-hydrochloric acid) and converted into chloride by chlorine used either as a gas or solution, soluble in solutions of cyanides in the presence of air. There are many uses for the various preparations of which gold forms the basis, and in one form (purple of cassius) it is used in the preparation of ruby glass. 
There seems to be very little absurdity to believe in a "universal ens that resolves all bodies into their ens genitale", even if one knows nothing whatever about the alchemical Arts. Van Helmont calls it: the highest and most successful of all salts; which having obtained the supreme degree of simplicity, purity, subtility, enjoys alone the faculty of remaining unchanged and unimpaired by the subjects it works upon, and of dissolving the most stubborn and untractable bodies; as stones, gems, glass and sulphur (which latter modern chemistry does not know how to dissolve), metals, etc., into red salt, equal in weight to the matter dissolved; and this with as much ease as hot water melts down snow. It is into this fluid that common glass was immersed for several hours in order to acquire the property of malleability. 
In 'Isis Unveiled'; Madame Blavatsky quotes "a foreign correspondent of the Theosophical Society, a well-known medical practitioner, and one who has studied the occult sciences for upward of thirty years, has succeeded in obtaining what he terms the 'true oil of gold', i.e. the primal element. Chemists and physicists have seen and examined it, and were driven to confess that they neither knew how it was obtained nor could they do the same." (Isis Unveiled: Part 1, chapter 2, p51) 
This 'Adamic earth' is next-door neighbour to the alkahest, and one of the most important secrets of the alchemists. No Kabalist will reveal it to the world, for as he expresses it in the well-known jargon: "it would explain the eagles of the alchemists, and how the eagles' wings are clipped", a secret that it took Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) twenty years to learn. 
The writer of this Lecture you are now reading witnessed and carefully examined a new and secret process of changing different metals into gold by 'stepping them up or down' by means of electric currents, combined with certain chemicals. The resultant gold was proof against every test known to Science, and only a true alchemist could tell its origin, there being a final test not known to Science. 
Though it has been the amiable custom of many scientists (not all, however) to sneer at the ancient masters of alchemy, more than one pathologist, chemist, homeopath, etc., has quenched his thirst for knowledge in the books of Paracelsus. Frederick Hufeland (1762-1836) got his theoretical doctrines on infection from this mediaeval "quack" as Sprengel once delighted in calling one who was immeasurably higher than himself. Hemman, who endeavours to vindicate this great philosopher, and nobly tries to redress his slandered memory, speaks of him as the "greatest chemist of his time", in his 'Medico-Surgical Essays'. 
"Who", exclaims Pfaff, "what man has ever taken more comprehensive views of nature than Paracelsus? He was the bold creator of chemical medicines; the founder of courageous parties; victorious in controversy, belonging to those spirits who have created among us a new mode of thinking on the natural existence of things". Professor Molitor and Dr. Ennemoser spoke as highly of him; and according to their criticisms on the labours of the Hermetists, Paracelsus is the most "wondrous intellect of his age", and "a noble genius". 
History is full of examples describing alchemical and magical operations. There are instances when divine music was heard "in the air”; rich perfumes, so strong that for weeks their odour remained, and many other phenomena. Baptista Porta, in his treatise on 'Natural Magic', enumerates a whole catalogue of secret formulae for producing extraordinary effects by employing the occult powers of nature. Although the 'Magicians' believed as firmly as our spiritualists in a world of invisible beings or spirits, none of them claimed to produce his effects under their control or through their sole assistance. They knew too well how difficult it is to keep away the elementary creatures when they have once found the door wide open. Even the Magic and Alchemy of the Ancient Chaldeans was but a profound knowledge of the powers of simples and minerals. It was only when the theurgist desired divine help in spiritual and earthly matters that he sought direct communication through religious rites, with spiritual (not material) beings. And even with these learned men, those spirits remain invisible and only communicate with mortals through their awakened inner senses, such communications were possible only when the theurgist in question evoked them subjectively and as a result of purity of life, and by prayer. But all physical phenomena were produced simply by applying a knowledge of natural forces. Men possessed of such knowledge and exercising such powers patiently toiled for something better than the vainglory of a passing fame. Seeking it not, they became immortal, as do all who labour for the good of the race, forgetful of mean Self. Illuminated with the light of eternal Truth, these alchemists and Magicians fixed their attention upon the things that lie beyond the common ken, recognising nothing inscrutable but the First Cause, and finding no question unsolvable. To dare, to will, and remain silent, was their constant rule; to be beneficent, unselfish, and unpretending, were, with them, spontaneous impulses. They knew that it was useless to apply to the inhabitants of the First and Second Astral Realms above (let alone the two below the Earth-Plane), for their inhabitants are but ordinary men, simply men on a different plane, and knowing no more than men on Earth; some of them not even being aware that they are no longer on Earth, a large percentage asleep or unconscious according to their states of evolution, many utterly lost and bewildered in a state between waking and dreaming; some sublimely happy in their visionary surroundings; but none wiser than men on earth; none being able to act as wise guides to lead erring man along the road to the true Light.... for they themselves have not found it, else they would dwell in the Third Realm above the Earth, or on the Fourth Divine Plane, in other words. And those who dwell there have nothing to do with the affairs of earthly men, unless in some very rare cases (when compared with the multitudes of men on earth — about 2,000,000,000 being the average normal number at all times in incarnation here). But all this is a subject for our Higher Studies. 
Alchemists claim that primordial or pre-Adamic earth, when reduced to its first substance, is in its second stage of transformation like clear water, the first stage being the alkahest, or universal solvent, proper. This primordial substance is said to contain within itself all that goes to make up man; it has not only the elements of his physical being, but even the "breath of life" itself in a latent state, ready to be awakened. This it derives from the "incubation" of the Spirit of God upon the face of the waters or chaos; in fact, this substance is chaos itself. The echoes of this are found in the Northern Mythologies as the passive principle of Creation; and this led to the idea of the creation of the universe out of water. 
In the Chaldean legend of Berosus, Oannes or Dagon, the man-fish, instructing the people, shows the infant world created out of water, and all beings originating from this prima materia. Moses taught that only earth and water can bring forth a living soul (this teaching was for the multitude); and we read in the Scriptures that herbs could not grow until the Eternal caused it to rain upon earth. In the Mexican Popol Vuh man is created out of mud or clay, taken from under water. Brahma creates Lomus, the great Muni (or first man), seated on his Lotus, only after having called into being Spirits, who thus enjoyed among mortals a priority of existence (See our discussions on the First Race in Lecture No.2 of this Grade), and he created him out of water, air and earth (See Second Race of Man, and note that Fire is not mentioned as yet). 
Paracelsus calls salt "the centre of water, wherein metals ought to die” (this has another and deep meaning. . . .we wonder if you can guess by now what it really means, and let us have your reply in your next report); and van Helmont terms the alkahest "the most successful of all salts". Both of these Philosophers teach about it as follows: 
(1). "The alkahest never destroys the seminal virtues of the bodies thereby dissolved: for instance, gold, by its action, is reduced to a salt of gold: antimony to a salt of antimony etc., of the same seminal virtues or characters without the original concrete. 
(2). The subject exposed to its operation is converted into three principles, salt, sulphur and mercury, and afterwards into salt alone, which then becomes volatile, and at length is wholly turned into clear water. 
(3). Whatever it dissolves may be rendered volatile by a sand-heat; and if, after volatilizing the solvent, it be distilled therefrom, the body left is pure, insipid water, but always equal in quantity to its original self.” 
By "seminal virtues", van Helmont meant that elementary substances have their original properties, which the entering into compounds only temporarily modifies never destroys. With regard to the statements made about the alkahest by such scientists as Paracelsus and van Helmont, statements that have ever been hotly denied by Science, we should remember that such men of intellect and conscience did not lie for the pleasure of bewildering and disgusting posterity. Later on we shall go much more deeply into Alchemy, but next week we must have a talk about the properties of the blood; thus preparing you gradually for our coming talk on magnetic and other healing. And considering that the average man has in addition to over nine thousand millions of nerve cells in the cerebral cortex of his brain alone, or about three times the present human population of the Globe, twenty-five billions of oxygen-capturing blood corpuscles, which, if spread out would occupy a surface of 9,900 square feet (920 square metres), the subject assumes a certain importance! 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
