SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 39. 

Dear Disciple, 
One of the important studies in this Grade is connected with the purposes of life on this Earth, from the lowest to the highest forms; in other words an introduction to Biology and Microbiology and the evolution of living structures or organisms. We shall deal with the subject in this and the next Lecture to begin with, and then follow on with a discussion on Occult Healing Processes. 
Science now realises that life on Earth began with simple cells and even smaller organisms billions of years ago. This is true, but the time period expressed by the words 'billions of years' is very elastic. Does Science mean two billion years ago, or two hundred or two thousand? We are not told - though recently scientists appear to have reached a consensus which postulates that simple cells evolved some 3.8 billion years ago. But if you look up Lecture 6 at the beginning of this Grade, in which we gave you the great world cycles, you will see that these cycles cover immense periods - even when reckoned in billions of years with a billion as the unit. These cycles were and are scoffed at by many scientists; but the fact remains that during the last century Science was forced to go back further and further into the past history of our globe in order to endeavour to find time periods that will allow for the ages necessary for 'evolution' to proceed and work out the Divine Plan of Life and Being. 
When this lecture was first written in 1940, the earliest hominid was thought to have lived some 200,000 years ago. In the 1970's that date was pushed further back to 3 million years in the wake of the discoveries of Richard Leakey and others in Africa. Thirty years later, a new hominid, 'Ardi' (Ardipithecus ramidus), was found, pushing back the date still further to 4.4 million years ago. (National Geographic, October 2009). In 2018 the jawbone of a primate known as Graecopithecus freybergi, first discovered in Germany in 1944, and dating back 7.2 million years, was re-classified as those of a hominid and not an ape as had previously been thought (Science News, May 2017). In November 2019, German paleontologist, Madelaine Böhme, unearthed the fossils of an ancient ape in a clay pit in Bavaria thought to be approximately 11.6 million years old. Some scientists believe that this new species, named Danuvius guggenmosi, is a common ancestor of modern humans. 
These recent discoveries also call into question the prevailing scientific theory that man first emerged in Africa. Actually he emerged in all parts of the world, but that is a subject for future lectures. 

Meanwhile we must return to our present theme-Life on Earth. We shall base our discussions on the very latest theories of Science, with, perhaps, an occasional remark here and there. But we must impress on your mind here and now that Science is still groping in the dark, in spite of all the fine research work by its foremost representatives. And we should like you to bear in mind at all times the Laws and Principles of Occult Science that we have given you, so far, when you read, or hear of any scientific opinions, theories and as well as dogmas, findings or conclusions upon the subject of Life on any other subjects. For the Divine Laws never alter, and can be applied to all life's phenomena and to the material as well. You should by now be in a position to judge for yourselves a great many things, and it is necessary that you should use at all times your critical faculties in every way, and apply them to all sorts of things and subjects under the Sun and beyond it! This is the real Occult Scientific training; for we want our Students to be free and untrammelled in every way, and not the meek followers and tame slaves of our opinions; although we should add that in reality we have never yet, and never shall, try to enforce our own opinions upon you, but have only given you the Ancient Teachings brought up-to-date; and this is the only basis upon which you should found all your future decisions. Think for yourself! Already you hold many of the keys in your hands. 
"The question of the origin of life on our earth," said Dr. R. Beutner, M.D. Ph.D. in his book 'Life's Beginnings on the Earth', in 1939, "is of such fundamental importance that Science should make every conceivable effort to solve it even though up to a short time ago very little was known about it. We should realise that the difficulties which we experience in handling this great problem are entirely within ourselves; they are partly due to the incompleteness of our knowledge and partly due to the narrowness of the viewpoints which result from our too limited experience." Now, this is an honest and straightforward statement, and it is a pleasure to read it. Incidentally it throws overboard all the theories of the 'epoch-making' works of Darwin, Haeckel and company! 
Unfortunately the same author stated in another book 'Physical Chemistry of living Tissues', that "Life, therefore, in spite of all its complexity, seems to be no more than one of the innumerable properties of the compounds of carbon." Now this is where Science has always gone wrong, though it is becoming more and more cautious in its statements these days as well it might. In 1972, two famous biologists, Gerard J. Tortora and Joseph F. Becker, diluted this statement to read: "The element carbon, perhaps more than any other, is characteristic of organic matter." This is certainly an improvement, but scientists still will not recognise that there is a higher principle that causes Life to manifest in the material. What a pity! Science still thinks, after sneering for over 300 years at Paracelsus and his 'Homunculi' that it is possible to fabricate life in a test tube. 
Indeed Science has made some truly remarkable factual discoveries during the last 50 years - and we do not sneer at them. For instance, the techniques for the assembling of three dimensional Structures led to the consequential decoding of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid) in 1953, which are now known to be the genetic materials of all organic life. But these are still only material discoveries, despite the wondrous possibilities these investigations of Science hold forth for the future. In 1967 an American Scientist was awarded the Nobel Prize when it was said he 'created' (?) the entire genetic material (or DNA) of a small virus. He then got this DNA to produce new viruses in the test tube. But what in effect he did was to set up a chemical printing press that could produce DNA copies from a master die. This master DNA was made by a virus, not man, but this has not prevented scientists from trying to make a master die. In the 1980s, researchers using recombinant DNA technology succeeded in manufacturing genetically engineered human insulin. Now, a team of scientists led by Craig Venter have successfully synthesized the genetic code of the bacterium Mycoplasma mycoides and transplanted this into the existing cell of another bacterium that had had its DNA removed. This 'new' bacterium, nicknamed 'Synthia' is said to be capable of replicating billions of times (Science May 2010). So it may be, but we say again that this is still a copy, not a 'new' life-form. Later, it is predicted, as other proteins are synthesized, one might have 'protein factories' producing rare, expensive, or impossible-to-purify substances for the victims of genetic and virulent diseases who cannot make these materials themselves. 
However we must still throw overboard these hopes and speculations of Science for the time being and see just what it has discovered about Life up to now; that is: Life as it has been produced by the Creators, who are even greater than Scientists. Some time ago Dr. W. M. Stanley, of the Rockefeller Institute at Princeton, New Jersey, discovered a virus which causes infectious diseases, and hence constitutes a living entity, but it is at the same time a 'substance' which can be obtained in pure form as crystals. It was then said that "through Stanley's 'epoch-making discovery', more definite assumptions on the origin of life can now be made than ever before." 
Here we have another of those famous 'epoch-making' discoveries about which we spoke before, we believe. But what does it really amount to? It simply means that 'life' in the crystal form is latent, and that it becomes active again when the crystals are in solution or dispersed in the atmosphere in the form of gas. We are almost tempted to use an American slang expression here and ask: 'So What?' However, biologists have made rapid strides forward since then and found many more forms of 'crystallised Life' but they are still no nearer the solution though they are now under the impression that the answer lies in DNA, as the recent experiment of Craig Venter described above demonstrates. 

The first forms of life appeared on Earth in the simplest shapes. . . .and the smallest. We may be quite sure that they were smaller than size of what are now called 'filterable viruses', the largest of which is 0.2 Microns. These viruses are invisible under the most powerful optical microscopes, but they can be viewed with electron microscopes; they have been photographed and 3D computer models of them have been built they are amazingly complex. Until the 20th century, the only kind of virus known to Science were the disease producing varieties, for if a few of them are inoculated into a plant or animal, they will multiply at an appalling rate, are readily transferred from plant to plant, animal to animal, and from man to man. Such are the causes of influenza in all its manifold forms, of smallpox, rabies, yellow fever and trachoma. Each disease is produced by a different virus, and their behaviour resembles very closely that of the visible germs (i.e. visible under optical microscopes), the bacteria which causes diseases like cholera, typhoid fever, diphtheria and pneumonia. In the 1920's scientists discovered a whole new class of viruses called bacteriophages that infect bacteria. In fact, the word literally means 'bacteria eater,' because bacteriophages destroy their host cells. All bacteriophages are composed of a nucleic acid molecule that is surrounded by a protein structure. They are increasingly used as an alternative to antibiotics in the treatment of infectious diseases and as agents to target cancer cells. 
It was only in comparatively recent times that some scientists began to admit that filterable viruses were probably alive; this was chiefly because their size is so small. There was a vague idea that a 'living' organism must have 'organs' such as skin, for instance. The viruses being so diminutive were considered too small to have any organs. This was nonsense, of course; for as the Arabs say: "All things are possible with Allah." We wish we could say that scientists now know better, even if they have not been converted to Islam! But this is not the case, for the clever men and women in white coats continue to argue among themselves as to whether viruses are alive or not. Despite this, viruses are now known to be composed of a nucleic acid core and a protein coat, some of them having heads', 'hollow tubular tails', 'base plates', 'tail-fibres' and probably many more appendages which Science has not yet discovered! In any case, one has only to remember the structure of the atom to know that size means nothing, for it is but a faulty realisation of our human perceptions. 
When this particular Lecture was originally written, which was before the recent developments in biotechnology, genetic modification and prior to the decoding of DNA and RNA, we assumed the existence of a hypothetical, minute but benevolent, organism based upon the quite reasonable assumption that if there existed viruses which were disease producing, and therefore malevolent and negative, there must also exist their opposite and counterpart, and being of a positive nature, for there are always two sides to everything, even a bad penny. For want of a better term we called them 'Vitalins'. According to the never failing Laws such a body must exist. When we last updated this lecture in 2020 Science had not discovered any such organism — but that is not to say it does not exist! 
However, for the moment, let us dispense with these so far undiscovered minute positive organisms which we called Vitalins, and adopt the views of Science which assumes that DNA is the 'Self-thinking', 'Self-generating' genetic material of Life itself. It is neither desirable at this stage of our Studies, nor is it possible in the space available, that we delve too deeply into the construction and constituent parts of this 'wonder' material - in any case we discuss it in a most detailed manner at a future time all we require at the moment is a concise picture of what Science says it is and does. 
DNA has been found to consist of two sugar-phosphate chains of molecules interwound in a helical manner and incorporating four nitrogen bases, which act like rungs of a ladder and hold the strands of the sugar-phosphates apart. This substance is to be found in most viruses (some contain RNA instead of DNA), in the nucleus of cells, and in the chromosomes which carry over the information during cell division. Science declares that DNA molecules are responsible for storing the genetic code; that it is capable of replicating itself endlessly; that it directs the chemical processes within the cell and in fact is considered to be the 'brain', so to speak, which decrees and builds up the amazing variety of proteins and other materials which are needed to keep any form of organic life alive. This of course, is but a skeleton outline of an exceedingly intricate chain of processes, but nevertheless, this is what it boils down to in the end. 
We have little quarrel with any of this so far as it goes, but in simple language it still does not tell us what 'directs' the actions of these exceedingly remarkable molecules. Could it be something like our extremely minute and suppositious 'Vitalins'? Did these infinitesimal but beneficent and positive 'entities' guide the nucleic acids to form in certain necessary combinations with the amino acids? So that in the course of 'evolution' they combined in various ways, according to the immutable Laws, and produced larger and different organisms, branching out very widely and reaching diversified and numerous 'peaks', where 'evolution' was no longer necessary or desired by the Creators, or even possible; some 'peaks' being possibly as small as the 'visible' organisms to be seen under a powerful microscope, others reaching their 'peak' in the size and shapes of the monstrous pre- historic animals we have all heard about, and whose huge skeletons may be seen at the Natural History Museum at South Kensington in London, and in other great collections. 
In our discussion on man's brain we have seen how evolution caused it to grow from the small 'first' brain, controlling heart and lung action, etc., until man's brain became what it is today and was a million years ago in the case of the so-called 'Peking Man' (Homo erectus pekinensis). We, of the Order. know that great races of Man lived long before even that man from Peking, whose skull was found embedded in a rock, and had to be drilled out by means of a dentist's drill, a very fine piece of work incidentally. 
We will continue this discussion next week. 
This Lecture completes the Third Pyramid of this Grade, and if there are any questions we shall be glad to hear from you, and a report on your progress will be welcome also.
 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
