SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 3. 

Dear Disciple, 
In the Occult Doctrine the Unknown and the Unknowable Mover, or the Self-existing, is the Absolute Divine Essence. And thus being Absolute Consciousness and Absolute Motion to the limited senses of those who describe this indescribable it is unconsciousness and immovableness. Concrete Consciousness cannot be predicated of abstract consciousness, any more than the quality 'wet' can be pre- dicated of water wetness being its own attribute and the cause of the wet quality in other things. Consciousness implies limitations and qualifications; something to be conscious of, and someone to be conscious of it. But Absolute Consciousness contains the cognizer, the thing cognized and the condition, all three in itself and all three One; another aspect of the Trinity. 
We call Absolute Consciousness "Unconsciousness", because it seems to us that it must necessarily be so, just as we call the Absolute "Darkness", because to our finite understanding it appears quite impenetrable. Yet can that "Darkness" become the most glorious Light if we cast aside all attempts to penetrate it by the "reasoning powers" of our "intellects", and turn towards the inner Wisdom which we call our "Souls", although, as you know, it is not within us but without. In spite of this we can illuminate the true material darkness of our material inner minds the Higher Mind if we allow this mind, by an act of Will and desire for Light to reach out to the Soul by means of meditation and concentration while relaxing at the same time our material "thinking habits". 
In this manner it is possible to attune with the Unknown Realms in the same manner as the Great Seers of all times have succeeded in doing so. Yet - we must know just what we are attuning with; we must be able to recognise each region above the Earth-Plane and know it for what it is. And if we do not know the correct way we shall fall into the same errors that so many clairvoyants have done all through the history of the present world-cycle and in any previous cycle here or elsewhere. 
- 
This then is the purpose of our present studies; to present unto you that higher knowledge of which the world of human beings as a whole is totally ignorant; and, according to Occult Doctrines, those who are ignorant dwell in SIN, though it is not that kind of Sin about which we hear so much in the various churches. 
When Swedenborg had his great Visions, he had no idea on which Plane or Planes he beheld the glorious scenes with which he attuned in his exaltation. To him they were all "Heaven", as it were, and every inhabitant was an "Angel", so to say. For this reason many of his descriptions have been challenged by other Seers (who also did not know the real differences), for the scenes and beings described by Swedenborg did not seem to be the same that those other clairvoyants saw; neither were the 'conditions' the same. When Swedenborg said that the "Angels" wore clothes just like those we know on Earth, only more etherealised, he was contradicted at once, or later, by those who stated that the clothing of those Beings consisted of 'woven rays of light'. Both were right and wrong! 
If you will remember one of our earliest lectures in the First Grade, you will know that in our discussions of the atom etc., we stated that Man does not know the material conditions in which he dwells, for not only is nothing what we think it is, but everyone has a different impression of the Illusions which surround us from all sides in the material worlds. 
We might say — in truth — that everything on Earth and in the Three Realms above consist of rays of woven light and vibrations. Yet everything seems solid enough to our senses. It is difficult to realise that when you run into a wall in the dark, or anything else, that it has no substance in actuality!! If it is an 'Illusion' it can be a very hard and substantial one under such, or other, conditions. It all seems very real to us, and it is real as far as we are concerned, even if we know that it is not actual. 
In the Three Realms above the same law holds good. Everything seems to be as real as it is on Earth, though it is much more beautiful and sublime. But the higher we proceed the more refined and ethereal all becomes, the more happiness and bliss is evident, and the more glorious the Light. At the same time there is not that rigidity as we know it on Earth. One of the finest descriptions in connection with this can be found in the 'Book of Enoch', called the 'Book of God' (see note at end). 
In the second chapter of this inspired work there is the description of: "A city splendid with gold and marble; with stately towers, palaces and temples". And when Enoch asks one of the guards: "Friend! how long hath stood this noble city?" the guard replies: "This city hath always stood, its years are without number, it will stand for ever". And when a thousand years are gone Enoch comes again to that same place, and all he finds is a desert. He meets a Wanderer and asks him "O friend', where is that noble city?" The answer is: "This wilderness hath stood for ever and will stand for ever; there is no city, neither hath there been; but all is desert as thou seest". A thousand years after that it is a smiling plain with tents and "Shepherds with their flocks and herds, and children playing among flowers". A thousand years later it has become "an Ocean rolling with great billows"; and always he receives the same answer: "Thou dreamest, it has always been thus and ever will be the same". 
On the Higher Planes (numbers two and three) there are similar changes; only, the scenery may change in a month, a week, a day, or in the twinkling of an eyelid. Only on the Fourth Plane are there no the changes like these, and everything remains as it is. Yet appearance of the Plane may vary with the Consciousness of each Ego. One may behold it in one way, to another it may seem something quite different. But whatever it seems to be: it remains constant in its endless variations of Splendour and Loveliness. On the Second Plane above, this consistency is less, and on the First Plane above the Earth there may be a rapid and constant change of all the Spirit beholds. 
In the above, then, you have a clue. As soon as your Higher Mind succeeds in reaching out to these Higher Planes by means of your meditations and attunements you will be able with practise decide just with which Plane you have been in contact. 

There are also the degrees of Light. On the First Plane above there is a silvery radiance; on the Second a pale golden sheen; and on the Third above the Earth-Plane a rich golden radiance that is indescribable. 
If anyone has been through a serious illness and during convalescence obtains but one glimpse of that Fourth Realm, there will be such an inrush of vitality into the system that the patient makes a 'miraculous' recovery. 
But 'miracles', as such, do not happen. They would be a negation of Divine Law, and contrary to God's own Will, by means of which all the Laws of the Universe are fixed inviolably for ever and for ever and for all eternity. 
In the above is hidden a further clue, or key, to the 'miracles' of so-called 'magnetic' healing, or to the 'miracles' that occur at such places as Lourdes, to mention only one of the best known localities, and apart from the fact that in many such places there are quite different factors at work on account of the minerals present in earth or water, and even in the air, which may be filled with thin vapours rising up from the depths of the earth and having curative qualities in respect of certain diseases. 
Any man or woman who can effect cures by the 'laying on of hands', or by any other means, can do so only if they are able to attune with one of the Higher Planes and thus become a medium through which the vitalising streams of energy can run from those regions to the 'patients'. The same applies to those who visit Lourdes; they must raise their consciousness by means of religious or other 'ecstasy' to those planes, and so they are flooded with the wondrous effulgence of that Region to which they have reached out successfully. This is the only mystery of the 'miraculous' cures effected by the Master Jesus and other Holy Men. These are not miracles but natural effects of the Holy Laws. 
One of the physical descriptions of Swedenborg which is absolutely right (although we cannot say the same of all his writings and visions - proving that he was human) is the following. 
"The Spirit-world to outward view, is altogether similar to the natural world: lands, mountains, hills, valleys, plains, fields, lakes, rivers, fountains, appear there; also paradises, gardens, groves, woods containing trees of all kinds with all fruits and seeds; also plants, flowers, herbs and grapes, consequently all things of the vegetable kingdom; animals, birds and fishes of all kinds, consequently all things of the animal kingdom. The roads which lead to the Celestial Kingdom (???) are bordered with olive trees and fruit trees, because the Olive trees correspond to the affection of good; the roads which lead to the Spirit Kingdom (???) are bordered with laurels and vines, because the vine and the laurel correspond to the love of the true". 
Here Swedenborg senses the different planes, but there are no roads from one to another! Neither are the Regions he calls the 'Celestial Kingdom' and the 'Spirit Kingdom' such. What he describes here is the First Plane above the Earth-Plane (Realm Two). The Plane above that (Realm Three) is very similar, except for the pale golden light and the greater beauty of the scenes. The Fourth Plane or Realm is described in one of its aspects by him in the following manner. (What he says above about the olive trees, vines, etc., is an interpretation of his own Higher Mind). 
"I have seen palaces in Heaven magnificent beyond description. Their upper parts were refulgent as if they were pure gold, and their 
lower parts as if they were precious stones. Some were more splendid than others, and the splendour without was equalled by the magnificence within. The rooms were ornamented as neither language nor Science can adequately describe. On the South (?) were paradises in like manner glorious. In some the leaves of the trees were like silver, and the fruits like gold. The flowers in beds were like rainbows". 
Now when you meditate in future try to project the 'pinpoint' towards one of these regions and tell us later on of your results. 
May the Bliss and the Glory attend you always. 
Your Hidden Master. 
Note: The description given above is from the only genuine edition of The Book of Enoch, published in the 19th century by Dr. E.V. Kenealy. We will discuss this book further in Lecture Number 12 of this Grade. 
