SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 37. 

Dear Disciple, 
In our three preceding Lectures we have seen how the 'Arts' have been known and practised during various ages in the history of mankind. There are a great many stories about hidden 'treasure' being buried in all sorts of localities, and the researches and excavations in Egypt, Greece, etc., have brought many such treasures to light. The museums in every land are full of them and some of the more recent additions to the various art-treasures were discovered during the excavations at Ur, located at the site of modern Tell el-Mukayyar in Iraq, under the direction of Sir Leonard Woolley (1880-1960). He found many ravishing examples of ancient art, now in the British Museum, when he 'dug up the past', and rescued the jewellery and other things that were once the pride of the people of Ur of the Chaldeans. Since then Chinese archaeologists have discovered numerous royal tombs and their priceless treasures have been exhibited in many cities, including London in 2007, when the famous Terracotta Army was on display in the British Museum. It would be worth your while obtaining one or two books describing these various finds. 
But there is a large tract of country, never properly explored yet; around which hang more traditions of buried treasure than any other locality, and that is the Gobi Desert. In that place, if report speaks correctly, there was once the richest and one of the greatest Empires the world has ever known. Beneath the surface of this howling waste of shifting sands is said to be such wealth in gold jewellery, statuary, arms, utensils and all that includes civilisation, luxury and fine arts, as no existing capital of Christendom can show today. The Gobi sands move regularly from East to West before terrific gales that blow almost continually. Occasionally some of the hidden treasures are uncovered, but not a native dare touch them, for the whole district is under a mighty ban, they say. Death would be the penalty. Bahti - hideous but faithful gnomes 
guard the hidden treasures of the pre-historic people! Awaiting the day when the revolution of the cyclic periods shall again cause their story to be known for the instruction of mankind. 

It is now generally admitted that, from time immemorial, the distant East, India especially, was the land of knowledge, art, and every kind of learning. With the Hindus, Occult Science was, and is, even more esoteric (if that were possible) than it was with the Egyptian Priests. So sacred was it deemed that its existence has never been more than half-admitted, and especially the Art of Magic was practised only in certain dire emergencies. It was more than a religious matter, for it was considered divine. The Egyptian Hierophants, notwithstanding their practise of stern and pure morality, could not be compared with the ascetical Gymnosophists, either in holiness of life or miraculous powers developed in them by the supernatural abjuration of everything earthly. By those who knew them well they were held in still greater reverence than the Magians of Chaldea. "Denying themselves the simplest comforts of life, they dwelt in woods, and led the life of the most secluded hermits”, says Ammianus Marcellinus, while their Egyptian brothers at least congregated together. Notwithstanding the slur thrown on all who practised Magic and Divination, history has proclaimed them as possessing the greatest secrets in medical knowledge and unsurpassed skill in its practise. It should be stated here, however, that the form of excessive asceticism practised in India, past or present, is not only unnecessary for proper spiritual progress, but also impossible in Western climes. 
Another thing is that the merit claimed by the practise of these austerities is well balanced by the pleasure the 'holy men' derived from the divine visions conjured up by these exercises, fasts, meditations and so on. It comes to this, that these men are concerned only, as a rule, with their own private and personal progress. A man who retires from the world and sits in a cave, on a mountain or in a forest, doing nothing but meditate, is of not much service to his fellow-men; for it is impossible to make another share in one's visions. Therefore this asceticism is nothing more than a form of grandiose selfishness. It is only by means of service that we may hope to gain our reward provided that we do not serve for the sake of the reward, and develop at the same time our inner perceptions and learn to attune with that Divine Realm for which all long, according to their strength of intelligence and wise perceptions and the purity and unselfishness of their Higher Minds. 
Today Science has decided that the arts of painting and sculpture have been practised for about 20,000 years. The fallacy of this under- estimate becomes clear if you accept the ancient teachings and the various proofs we have quoted, even if you think of Egypt and India alone and do not wish to accept the teachings concerning the early Races. One of the latest concepts of the criticism of Art is that it is necessary to discover how far a work of art was conceived in response to free impulse, or aesthetic impulse, and how far it was concerned with biological or business ends in view. We must deny the term 'art', however, to anything that is used for 'business' exploitation; it then ceases to be art and becomes commerce. "Before America had discovered the hypnotic influence of pictorial images on the public, the man of business had nothing to say to the artist, with the sole exception 
of the portrait painter who was able to minister to his sense of self- importance. All other artists he regarded as certainly useless, probably mischievous, parasites upon society", as a modern writer has said. This fits in with the idea that any form of art is so much waste of time, which could be employed much better by making lipsticks, machine-guns or chocolate bars.... which you can sell for profit!! It is no easy matter to persuade a person who looks at life from a purely 'practical' angle that there is ever any justification for the economic waste of time and material in respect of the useless activities of those strange beings who want to 'create' objects of art, in play, as it were, and just for the sake of doing so. Thus an 'intelligent' person of that class would reason, and betray at once his extraordinary low and pitiful state of evolution. 
But the fact remains that the born artist will paint, write poems or books, compose music or play a musical instrument to perfection, make sculptures, create immortal masterpieces in gold and other metals, cut out dainty and lovely ivories, enthral thousands and millions of people with the divine art of singing, like a Caruso or Pavarotti and so many others; and the strange part of it is that so many people actually like to admire Art in one form or another! Probably these people are all wasting valuable 'economic' time, and they should be severely reproved and regimented into more useful occupations!! 
Yet.....man has always 'wasted' time. The Aurignacian, Neolithic, Palaeolithic and other cave paintings and drawings are still here to prove it. In South Africa, North and South America, Central Asia, Oceania, Indonesia, Polynesia, New Zealand — in all these places early man has been 'wasting his time', if we believe that these primitive hunters and savages existed and really painted all these figures, and the whole thing is not an elaborate hoax on the part of some lunatic who has travelled all over the world to fill up all the walls of the caves with his uneconomic and useless daubing and scribbling! 
 
As an example of how little the average modern writer on art understands the arts of the olden peoples, we shall quote a short paragraph, taken from a book published in London in 1931 and running into several editions (unfortunately). The writer (we will not even call him a 'critic' although even that is not always a compliment) says about Egyptian art; "No people has ever been so obsessed as the ancient Egyptians by the idea of a future life, above all by the idea of that life inhering in the corpse". We are completely at a loss to know what he means by this; the whole sentence is completely untrue and utterly absurd and shows a deplorable lack of knowledge of his subject. He goes on; "Hence the desire to preserve the latter for all eternity". Now there was a very great occult law behind the idea of the mummy, but it would be too much to expect this law to be known by the layman, hence we should, perhaps, not be too severe on him; but on the other hand — why write with pretended authority about things you do not understand? The writer continues; "In consequence, the early (?) Pharaohs strained even the vast economic (they simply can't get away from this fascinating term, can they?) resources of the realm to construct the most perdurable and infrangible homes for their own bodies (Still the same old fairy tale about the Pyramids being Tombs!) The logical outcome of this was the pyramid (now was it really?), a marvel of constructional engineering and masonry, but too purely utilitarian, too simply (?) geometrical to express complex aesthetic feeling". Then he goes on to prove, to his own satisfaction, that Egyptian art on the whole was purely a matter of business (ye Gods!) and non-aesthetic. And this is the kind of rubbish on which enlightening-seeking humanity is fed! You....who have kept us company during our excursions into the past, examining with us the great marvels of learning, philosophy, ancient religions, art and many other wonderful things during the last year and nearly nine months, will know much better than the conceited ignoramus who thus holds forth. But the rest of the readers and students of such trashy books are entirely misled, and this is an impertinent and unscrupulous procedure. The same man's discussions on the rest of antiquity are on a par with the few words we have quoted, but he was quite a well-known author all the same. In case any of our good students should imagine that anything has improved in the almost eighty years since his book was written, here is what another famous 'critic' had to say about Egyptian Art as recently as 2002: "Ancient Egyptian art can hardly be termed art, not if the word art is defined by only the creation of beautiful or thought-provoking works." Well, well, well...This shows the value of worldly 'fame' and the reason why your Teachers remain hidden, for they do not aspire to this sort of celebrity or to any other renown. 
The Russian philosopher, P. D. Ouspensky says: "Philosophy and Science are intellectual ways; religion and art, emotional ways". This is true, but it is necessary that the four divisions shall be combined into one grand edifice of perfection; one department blending with the other, and each with all. The man who can achieve this holds all the keys of Mind, Soul and Spirit within his hands, and his understanding will be of a Divine nature. It has been stated quite correctly that Religion is founded on Revelation; but why limit revelation to Religion only? No Philosopher can obtain real Wisdom without revelation; if he has none of revelation he can only use his intelligence which is a product of the Lower Mind tell you naught. The same applies to Science; without Revelation, or and though he may talk a lot, he will you may call it Divine Guidance, inspiration, or anything else that is applicable, the Scientist keeps on searching.... but he never finds. And who has ever heard of a truly great artist without Inspiration and Revelation? Revelation and inspiration both surpass all other knowledge. Without these first two the mind gropes in the dark. 

ONLY when TRUTH is revealed does the Light come streaming into the Higher Mind. The veil is torn away from the eye blinded by Matter and it SEES! All the speculations, logic, thought, synthesis, analysis and what not of Philosophy does not produce a wise Philosopher. All the experiments and observations of Science do not bring discovery, or revelation as long as the Light of the Spirit is hidden behind the material curtains. And all emotional understanding of art is naught as long as the artist's Higher Mind has not attuned with the great, divine and concealed Realms of the materially Unknown Effulgence of the 'Lords of the Ray' who dwell in these realms. Artists who cannot reach out to this hidden beauty are not sculptors but stone masons; not painters but daubers or producers of commercial advertising a la pretty chocolate boxes and shampoo; not poets, but scribblers, poetasters, versifiers or rhymesters; not musicians, but scrapers, thumpers or contortionists like the genus 'Rock star', 'Pop-groups', and the would-be composers of cheap and sugary ballads, 'club-music', 'techno', 'garage', 'rap' and other rubbish, lumber, trash, dross, sweepings and refuse. 

To refer to Ouspensky once more, he says: "Pseudo-religion, pseudo-philosophy, pseudo-science and pseudo-art are practically all that we know. We are fed on substitutes, on 'margarine' in all aspects and forms. Very few of us know the taste of genuine things" (P. D. Ouspensky, A New Model Of The Universe). Although this is a somewhat gloomy thought, and perhaps a little due to the Russian temperament of this eminent writer and exponent of the Psychological Method, there is nevertheless a great deal of truth in his statement, which is even more applicable today than it was when he wrote it nearly a hundred years ago. We have only to look and shudder at the bare walls of the 'modern home' to realise that the general appreciation of good works of art died with the Victorian age. But the truth of the matter is that all the great systems of religion, philosophy, science and art are the work of a few individual men. To be able to understand these few men — all great masters in their own various departments we must be able to attune with either them or the source from whence they derived their inspiration. 

We can attune with them if we sink our whole mind into the works they have produced; whatever those works are. It is for this very reason that we advised you to find Peace by means of the contemplation of works of art. We can attune with the source from which this inspiration or revelation comes by submerging our Higher Minds into the marvellous beauty of a flower, or by watching any beautiful scene in nature, or by merging ourselves into a glorious sunset, or by gazing up at the blue dome of heaven by day or night. If you lie on your back in the grass on a dry and warm day and look up to the sky, you will feel that it draws you towards itself. If the impression is very strong, you will have a sensation of falling into those blue depths. This is the result of projecting your Higher Mind into that vastness above, full of mystery and loveliness. Most of us are frightened at first when we experience that sensation; but there is no need for fear. If you 'let go', there is every possibility of receiving a wonderful revelation or message; even if you can never put it into words afterwards. You have attuned with the Source for a few moments, and you will never forget it; it may even work out many years afterwards into something that will lead you to your life's work! 

The masses, on the other hand, can never do these things. They must wait until their time comes; and to the masses belong those critics who can think only with the mass-mind, which is often concerned with the utility of things only and not with any beauty that may exist in the simplest little insect, running in the grass, or in a tiny wild flower, full of the great mystery of the Creators. They do not realise that their much-vaunted 'utility' is but so much 'futility'. They belong to the lower races, as compared with the higher development of the individual man who can escape from the material net for a while when he wills it so. That individual is as far removed from the masses as the Sun is from the Earth; for he belongs to the Sun, and they to the lower realms. Some thinkers believe that the lot of such individual men is tragic. Being raised far above the common herd, yet being in their midst at the same time, they believe he must feel utterly lonely and deserted. But this need not be so, for he can always escape and dwell in spirit with his own. When such men do not know or realise this sufficiently they become hermits, thinking to escape in that way. But, as we said before, this is a wrong attitude. They have been sent here for a definite purpose to deliver a certain message to those of the masses who are ready for it - and by running away they condemn themselves to another incarnation, when they must perform their task all over again. This is another reason why some of the Children of the Sun, the Fourth Divine Realm, have to incarnate several times. Having undertaken to do a certain thing, and failing to do it, they must return to Earth once more. Once the message is delivered they are free. Their task takes the form of a dominating urge or desire, which is often mistaken for a strong will; they are never imitators, but always leaders in one field or another. Thus we have 'Saints', 'Seers', exponents of the great Arts and Sciences, endowed with 'genius', which is no more than attunement with what some call the 'Unknown'. 

They often labour in a state of what is called ‘ecstasy'; which is no more nor less than Initiation and Illumination. At such times the 'power' flows into them and they transmit it to the rest of man. The opposite form of this ecstasy takes the form of pornography and the indulging in unclean living emotionally in various ways. Such beings belong to the lower realms of evil, below the earth-plane, and they have a dreadfully long journey to the higher things in front of them. Therefore they should be pitied and wisely controlled. We are concerned with these latter only in so far as it is our duty as students of the Divine Mysteries to try to lead the rest of mankind we contact in our daily peregrinations in life forward by imperceptible means, such as were mentioned in Lecture 14 of Grade 1 on Charity. 
We hope that these four lectures on Art have given you much food for thought, and a certain amount of pleasure. 
With best wishes 
Your Hidden Master. 
