SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 30. 

Dear Disciple, 
The Central Office of the nervous system has moved steadily forward from the Medulla to the Midbrain, then to the Interbrain, the Thalamus and Striate Bodies, the Cerebrum or Mantle Brain. This process of development is known as Telencephalization which literally means 'keeping the brain at the end'. No one who has watched animals can doubt that they have some means of silently spreading their news, but voice did not develop until creatures had left the water, and the frog was almost the earliest speech machine. The strange fact is that there is no one organ concerned with speech. The three pieces of machinery involved have each been evolved for quite different purposes. 
Breathing is a function of the sympathetic nervous system, depending on the chemistry of the air and the blood; the larynx, which we think of as the voice box, is really an organ developed for regulating the air supply to the lungs, and the tongue and palate were originally developed for chewing and swallowing food. The generally accepted theory is, that animals first emitted sound when convulsed by terror, hoping to scare off the enemy. As the brain developed, mere sound became varied into different calls. It is only for the communication of complex messages that man needs words, and only in man are the tongue and palate brought into partnership, with the result that words are formed and spoken. When we think of the amount of teamwork between various nerves serving the tongue, lips and jaw and in addition the nerves of the lungs, diaphragm and ribs, in short, various sections of all three of the great sensory nerve circuits, the marvel is, not that some of us stutter, but that anyone does anything else! 
All the way up the scale of animal evolution the story is the same, an increasing number of messages from the outside world calling for an increased number of exchange cells to deal with them and relay their information. To provide room, the brain grew out of all knowledge, the fundamental design remaining always the same, so that the relation between the brain of a genius and that of a rabbit is not one of kind but of degree. For the sake of simplicity we shall call the whole mass of the new brain the Cerebrum and the layers of cortical exchange cells which form its chief feature, the Cerebral Cortex. In contour the Cerebrum is not unlike a walnut, the wrinkled sides being almost divided by a central cleft under which run two subways carrying cables of connecting fibres. In some way, not yet completely understood, communication between the two sides of the Cerebrum appears to be directly connected with increased mental growth, as though it made for better teamwork between a double number of neurons, and long before the time of the cats, nerve fibres had pushed down from either side and formed a new and much larger connection, the Corpus Callosum. 
The consistency of the Cortex is about that of a tube of toothpaste, neither fluid nor yet quite firm and it is made up of an outer coating of 'grey matter' about a quarter of the total thickness, spread in a continuous layer over its surface and an internal core of white matter actually made up of myelinated nerve fibres (fibres coated with a glistening white cover, which means that they are in good working order). The grey matter, seen under the microscope, is built up of layers of cortical cells, the number of layers corresponding to the intelligence of the creature. Man has five layers, sometimes six, whereas a cat has roughly three. 
As the skull was not originally built to hold the Cerebrum, this new organ has to adapt itself to fit the skull. This is done by means of crumpling the smooth sheet into folds. The cat has a beautiful brain designed for strictly practical purposes. She can remember things, learn by experience and plan ahead; she will form a purpose and persistently carry it through, but in spite of her Buddha-like repose upon the hearth rug, she is not capable of meditating upon the 'abstract mouse', for she lacks those 'association areas' of the brain which are essential for abstract thought. These association areas lie in front of and behind a highly specialised region resembling a band, which passes over the head from side to side, like a headphone, along which lie the cells connected with the movements of the limbs. 
When we come at last to the brain of Man, there is an enormous increase in size, the flattened animal skull has become the rounded head of man. There is little change in the older parts of the brain and the special sense areas of the Cerebrum are placed just as they are in other mammals. As a result of experience gained in studying head injuries during the Second World War and since, the headphone band of motor areas is now clearly charted. It was also found that a large portion of the brain might be destroyed and yet after a while the functions of that part were recovered and carried on at lower levels, though not quite with the same perfection. However, the glory of Man's brain is the size and fullness of his Association Areas. They are now immensely enlarged and occupied by cells not concerned with any special sense, but with such things as memory, imagery, imagination and the power to think deep thoughts. In its power of making combinations the human brain exceeds all others. 
A simple way of dividing up the brain sections is as follows: 
1. The Medulla or Pons (the oldest part, sometimes called the 
stembrain) which was the brain of the earthworm, and in Man, is the vital little space where all the great nerve cables enter his skull, with the exception of those of the nose, eyes and internal organs. It is mostly concerned with keeping the body alive. 
2. The Cerebellum, an outgrowth of the stembrain which is concerned with the regulation of posture and movement. 
3. The Autonomic Ganglia dealing with food, breathing and reproduction of species. 
4. The Interbrain contains the Thalamus and the Striate Bodies which register feeling, whether of pleasure or otherwise, and give life its tone and colour. 
5. The Cerebrum and Cerebral Cortex or brain of intelligence which controls and directs; capable of delaying responses and combining them in order to deal with new and difficult situations. 
Each department is highly specialised in its particular work. Every individual makes different combinations and no two minds think alike. The Midbrain has been omitted from the above list as its functions have been mostly taken over by the later developed organs. (The reason why "no two minds think alike" is that no two Higher Minds are of the same perfection in evolution. Another reason is that there are seven kinds of Man, ranging from those at the lowest rung of evolution to the highest; the lower kinds only just commencing their cycles of incarnations, the higher on the point of leaving the Earth Realm for ever, and preparing to qualify for entrance to the Fourth Divine Realm. 
There are countless grades of states of evolutionary nuances between the seven main branches too; therefore no two Higher Minds can think alike (unless they happen to be those rare cases when "affinities" come together.) 
The various sections of the brain work in perfect harmony until some sort of emergency call arises, such as in the following instance. 
A student is about to attend an important examination, and he finds it impossible to eat. What has happened? The nerves serving the purposes of digestion have been checked while their supplies of blood and energy were mobilised by the central system to deal with his attack of fear. As soon as the strain is over he finds he is very hungry! If feeling be the mark of the Thalamic Brain, the virtue of the Cerebrum lies in its power to direct the storm. 
In an earlier lecture we mentioned the undesirability of drifting about on the tide of our likes and dislikes and the reason for this now becomes evident. It simply means that one is allowing the Thalamic Brain to run the ship, whereas perfect balance is only possible when the Thalamus and Cerebrum work together, in other words, one must function with a good combination of heart and brain. A capacity to feel strongly and think clearly- the two so closely knit that they appear as one, is the highest type of brain, and somewhat rare. The Cerebrum has what the Thalamus lacks, power to discriminate in time and space, and the interplay between these two parts is the basis of conscious thought. It might be mentioned that the Cerebrum has no feeling and although the Thalamus can be checked by the Cerebrum it cannot be made to feel by order, hence the conflict we sometimes experience through our emotions or perhaps the lack of them. When we meet a person who seems to have something at the back of his mind with perhaps a beautiful smile on his face but no laughter in his eyes, we can remember the following. The eyes are a prolongation of the thalamic region and they show feeling (or the lack of it) often in flat contradiction to the lips whose strings are pulled in the cortex. Speech is the function of the Cerebrum, but the Thalamus gives the voice its tone and by inflection, polite words can be made the most insulting. This is not hypocrisy for it is mostly involuntary and the only sham lies in pretending we can feel to order. 
In the Cerebrum we find areas not allotted to any special function. The sight area lies at the extreme back of the head, hearing is behind and around the ears, smell under the frontal fold near the back of the nose, and taste nearby. It has been found in certain cases that if some of the exchange cells serving these senses are injured, nearby neurons take over their work and carry on. This means there must be neurons with no specialised duties, reserves of intellectual powers that lie dormant and unused. We know that at birth, comparatively few neurons are myelinated ready for use and they are the ones for essential service. In the body this is a fairly simple process, but the brain is a great forest of nerve fibres and how a new impulse finds its way for the first time is as yet unknown. Once a trail has been made, constant use makes it a well-trodden highway. We all know the man with the one-track mind, whose answers we know beforehand, but the intelligent man takes keen delight in seeking out new paths. Other folk explore from East to West but never make a round journey, they prefer to go through life with no discomfort from diametrically opposed points of view. Of such was the Spanish Governor who, when asked to raise funds for the prevention of cruelty to animals suggested a Bull Fight as the best means. 
The richer the brain—that is, the more cells that are myelinated and in use - the more will routine work be left to customary ways and attention concentrated on things that matter. Many women claim to have the gift of intuition, some certainly have, but the majority forget that often the onlooker has seen the rabbit going into the hat whence later they produce it with so much genuine faith, that it is possible to follow the workings of what is, not a fraud, but an unconscious mental process. 
You may be interested to hear what happens during anaesthesia. Anaesthetics begins their work by putting out of action the neurons of the highest level in the Cortex; these cease to transmit messages, owing it is believed to some temporary poisoning of the cell which keeps the neuron fed and nourished. Cortical control being in abeyance, the lower levels tend to break out in violent movements, but with increasing unconsciousness these also cease to act. This level of consciousness would be sufficient to abolish any sense of pain, but down in the Midbrain a little behind and below the Thalamus there lies the mechanism for the control of muscular posture. Not until all the muscles are absolutely limp is the patient ready for the surgeon. The patient has now come down to the level of his Medulla. The heart beats, breathing goes on, the oldest part of the brain never fails until it fails forever, and in deep anaesthesia it allows major operations to be carried on in safety. 
During sleep the brain compartments cease work in a somewhat similar manner. Sleeplessness is often caused by indigestion or even bodily fatigue. The Cerebral levels are tired out but their neighbours down below are very much awake and bent on making a night of it and the brain has no soundproof doors! 
We should like you to bear in mind that the larger and more elaborate the brain and nervous system, the greater are its liabilities. It has more to do and it needs longer intervals of rest and recuperation. Furthermore we would mention certain changes in brain functioning that are the natural accompaniment of increasing age and failure of memory for recent events is one of them, while the past is as vivid as ever. The healthy mind accepts the fact as it accepts the need for glasses to read small print (which is also a brain function). The only fault lies in one's failure to admit that anything is altered or in nursing up a private source of worry. Compensation for this comes in the use we make of our store of experience from former years - and it is here that our Association Areas start to produce the real wisdom which is the outstanding feature of the intelligent elderly man or woman. 
For centuries a search was carried on for some special organ or seat in the brain where the Soul was enthroned, but nothing of the kind has been found. Students of Occult Science do not expect to find the Soul within the body and they will not be surprised to learn that instead of there being one single pinnacle of greatness, the very opposite really exists. From the isolation of the Amoeba, living by and for itself, some 100 billion cells, with all their possibilities of permutation and recombination have developed, and at each stage of advancement more is taken in by the distance receptors and more given out, for the neurons now have the capacity of ringing endless changes, which make possible the greatest heights and depths of human character. 
This lecture completes the fascinating subject of the brain and nerves. We hope that you will try to remember the details, for this knowledge will be useful when later on we develop these introductory discussions and give you some instructions about magnetic healing etc. 
Next week we shall discuss the first introduction to our studies of Alchemy, and in the meantime you have now completed another step forward in this grade. 
If there is anything you wish to write about we shall be glad to hear from you as usual. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
