SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 38. 

Dear Disciple, 
Before we come to the subject of Natural Healing it will be advisable to take a short survey of the internal organs and their functions, the most important of which is the heart. 
The blood is kept in a constant state of movement chiefly by the power of the heart. The rate of circulation varies at different hours of the day; in the afternoon it is at its maximum in the early hours of the morning (when we sleep) it is at its minimum. The heart is a hollow muscular organ weighing approximately 250 to 300 grams (9 to 11 ozs.) in females and 300 to 350 grams (11 to 12 ozs.) in males. It is just about the size of a closed fist and occupies a space in the chest just behind the breastbone, between the two lungs, the larger part being rather to the left of the median line. It is triangular in shape with the apex down- wards. The apex beat can be both felt and seen at a spot between the 5th and 6th ribs for at this point, as the heart is driven forwards, it strikes against the wall of the chest. 
The interior of this muscular bag is divided into two halves by a partition running from base to apex and each half is partially divided into two by an incomplete partition which is at right angles to the first. Thus the organ is divided into four cavities, the two at the base being called the auricles and the two towards the apex the ventricles. Between the right and left side of the heart there is no communication, but the auricles communicate with the ventricles by openings where the partition is incomplete. These openings are provided with valves which consist of little flaps or curtains. The valve between the right auricle and ventricle has three flaps while that between the left cavities has only two. Upon the structure of these valves and their efficient action depend not only health, but even life. The left ventricle is the portion of the heart which does the chief share of the work and it is the strongest part, being two or three times as thick as the right ventricle. At its upper part is the opening of the Aorta, the largest artery in the body. In the right ventricle is the orifice of the pulmonary artery which conveys the blood to the lungs. At the orifices of these two arteries are valves which are so arranged that they allow the blood to flow from the heart in one direction only, but close immediately it tends to flow in the opposite direction. When the valves close they make sounds which are easily detected through the chest wall. 
It is important to realise that though the heart is one of the hardest working organs, it works only 9 hours out of 24 per day. The rest of this time it is in a relaxed state and pausing to refill with blood between its beats. The heart hangs in a fibrous bag called the pericar- dium which is lubricated inside with a small quantity of clear fluid. 
Apart from the nervous control of the heart which links it with that of the rest of the body, there is an internal control within the organ which secures harmony. A piece of nerve substance, set at a point where the great veins flow into the organ, starts the actual contraction or beat which then spreads downward over the upper chambers to the lower ones, and this wave travels over a kind of electric cable known as "The Bundle of His". So long as this cable is intact and in full function, the harmony of the heart is maintained. Wounds of the heart which involve the bundle are immediately fatal, whereas wounds which only involve the muscles are not necessarily so. If the heart is removed from the body and placed alive in proper surroundings it will go on contracting at about 40 beats a minute, and may keep this up for a long time, but when functioning normally in the body, it beats 70 to 80 a minute, and moreover is responsive to all the calls the body makes on it. 
The Lungs occupy the greater portion of the cavity of the chest, having in between them the heart and large blood-vessels. They extend from the diaphragm to the neck and rise at least one inch above the highest rib. The upper extremity (the apex) is pointed while the base of the lungs is broad. Each lung is divided into partitions or lobes by deep fissures which extend from the surface of the lung almost to its root. The right lung has three lobes, the left only two. They are composed of greyish-pink spongy matter and weigh from 0.9kg to 1.14kg (2 to 21⁄2 lbs.). When healthy they float in water, but when diseased or devoid of air, they sink. The whole of the spongy substance is made up of an enormous quantity of minute, excessively thin walled cavities, called air cells. Each cell is about 0.25mm (1/100 inch) in diameter and it has been estimated that they number more than seven hundred millions. 
On one surface of their walls they have a network of innumerable minute blood-vessels while on the other surface they are in contact with the air in their cavities. In this way the blood and air are brought into very close contact with one another. The air cells are bound together in bunches like microscopic grapes and these are again connected with others to make up the substance of the whole lung. 
The outer surface of the lung is covered by a thin membrane called the pleura, a layer of which also lines the inner surface of the chest walls. It is smooth, shiny and moistened with a small quantity of clear fluid which prevents friction of the surface in the movements of respiration. Between these two surfaces is the pleural cavity. The air pressure within the lungs keeps these two surfaces of the pleura close together, and they only become separated by disease. 
Free ventilation of the lungs means well oxidised blood and people who breathe feebly are only using a small number of their millions of air cells, and if the lungs are not kept well open they are apt to become diseased. The normal rate of expiration and inspiration is about 18 times per minute. The relation between the number of respirations to heartbeats is fairly uniform and is as one to four or five. 
The Liver is a large solid organ weighing from 1.4kg to 1.6kg (3.1 to 3.5 lbs.) and is the largest gland in the body. Most people realise the importance of the liver and there is little doubt that its functions are even more extensive than is at present understood, in fact it may be regarded as a field of great possibilities in scientific research. It is a great storehouse for various chemical substances which are dealt with and given out as occasion arises. Such substances deal with the manufacture and storage of energy-giving substances obtained from the carbohydrates in the food. Carbohydrates needed for oxidation are stored in the liver in the form of glycogen and this is passed back to the blood as sugar, ready for oxidation. The liver manufactures bile, which is of great importance in the process of digestion. Very probably the colouring matter, or pigments, of the body are also controlled by the liver. When the liver is out of order the body more easily falls a victim to infection and toxins (poisons). The remarkable effect which the eating of raw, or lightly cooked, liver substance has upon the blood in cases of anaemia, suggests that the liver has an internal secretion which controls the manufacture of red blood cells. The liver is situated in the upper part of the abdomen, chiefly on the right side and is fairly well hidden under the ribs. It is impossible to sustain life without the liver or to maintain good health without an efficiently working liver. 
The Kidneys are situated in the loins, one each side of the spine, protected by the lower ribs, and embedded in a mass of fat. Each kidney weighs about 113 grams (4 ozs.). The left is longer and narrower than the right and placed a little higher up. The whole kidney substance is enclosed in a fibrous sheath called the capsule. While conforming to the general description of a gland, they are widely differentiated, inasmuch as they have very special functions to perform. They remove some of the waste products of metabolism from the blood which would otherwise act, and do act when the kidneys cease to function, as rapidly fatal poisons. These substances require large quantities of water to keep them in solution, and this also the kidneys extract from the blood and pass through their ducts to the bladder. 
The Pancreas or Sweetbread is another gland, which is situated below the stomach, and from which a duct carries its secretions pancreatic fluid to the intestines, entering the duodenum almost at the same spot as the bile duct joins it. In a former lecture we pointed out that the suprarenal glands (above the kidneys) can make a call on the liver for the increased supply of sugar (energy) in emergencies, but the influence of the pancreas is to regulate and inhibit the supply. If the pancreas breaks down there is loss of control over this issue of sugar from the liver and the sugar accumulates in the blood faster than it can be oxidised; it then becomes mere waste. 
After a great deal of research work by Dr. Banting and his colleagues at Toronto University it became possible to treat this condition with an endocrine substance now known as 'insulin'. The technical difficulties they had to overcome were enormous, because almost as soon as the gland is removed from the body of a freshly slaughtered animal a process of self-digestion begins, and the subtle secretions are destroyed by the more potent ferments of the ordinary secretion. These difficulties were eventually overcome and it is now used and taken for granted all over the world. 
The Spleen is a rather small organ although, after the liver, it is the largest gland in the body. It weighs about 170 grams (6 ozs.) and is shaped like the segment of an orange. It is dark red in colour and of a rather friable consistency. It lies under cover of the diaphragm and the lower ribs. The outer surface is moulded to the shape of the diaphragm, while the other three surfaces lie against the left kidney (behind) the stomach (front) and the intestines (below). A very small area is in contact with the pancreas. The blood vessels of the spleen (splenic artery and vein) are very large and enter it at a crevice known as the hilum. The fact that the spleen has a large blood supply is evidence of its importance. It has intimate connections with the sympathetic nervous system. The structure of the spleen is peculiar; its artery branches and divides into minute twigs, but those twigs do not join up with each other as do the arteries of other tissues. Their ultimate ramifications end in what is called the 'spleen pulp', where the blood appears actually to escape from the blood vascular system, and wanders in a soft network of branching cells, a network or sponge which is filled with red and white blood cells. The blood afterwards returns into veins and continues its course. The structure of the spleen and its relation to the blood vascular system clearly suggest that its function is the manufacture and renewal of the cellular elements of the blood and the elimination of the worn out elements. Removal of the spleen is possible, in which event its work is probably carried out by the lymphatic glands and other lymphatic structures and also by the red bone marrow.
In describing these internal organs we have not gone into details of their nerve control, but if you will refer to our previous lecture on nerves you will note that they are all controlled by the Sympathetic or Autonomic nervous system. In the lectures on the brain you will have noted that the Cerebrum, or brain of intelligence, can control the lower sections of the brain which makes it clear that the right mental attitude is of the greatest importance in the maintenance of perfect health. At the same time it is essential to give the body a well balanced diet and a good supply of fresh air, otherwise we cannot expect it to answer faithfully to all the calls made upon it. 
Before leaving this subject there is one interesting point we should like to mention about the eyes. In the middle part of the last century a good deal of time was devoted to the study of the Iris by Bernard Jensen, an American chiropractor. In the Iris there is a more or less complete map of the whole body, and a study of the various spots and markings to be found there will reveal all that is happening to the various organs. Some parts of the body have their markings on one eye and some on the other. Although 'iridology' or 'iridodiagnosis' as it is now called, has been largely ignored by orthodox medicine in Britain and America, this is not the case in much of Europe or Russia, where a considerable amount of use has been made of it, and in cases where disease has been difficult to locate it has proved of great value. As recently as 2000, a Russian trial involving 800,000 patients found Iridology to be 85% accurate in diagnosis (Yakymovich, V., Special Monitoring of human endurance and performance. Iridology Review, Spring 2000). Moreover, when Tutankhamen's tomb was opened in 1922, there were found several silver plates with pictures of the Pharaoh's iris' on them! 
And now, in the words of Socrates we say to you: "Learn also, my good friend, that your mind, existing within your body, directs your body as it pleases; and it becomes you therefore to believe that the Intelligence pervading all things directs all things as may be agreeable to it". 
With Best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
