SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 34. 

Dear Disciple, 
In one of our very earliest lectures of the First Grade (Number 2), we mentioned the importance of sinking the 'Self' in works of art, in lovely flowers, gems and so on, for this helps us to attain to that Peace which is so essential for the mastery of Occult Principles and laws. We can safely say that great Art, in whatever form, is the result of attunement with the Higher Realms and Beings; Realms where all is Peace and Beauty, peopled with inhabitants who have for ever left the lower spheres of materialism and ugliness, but who send out their thoughts to the lower planes in order to arouse mankind to a proper sense of the grandeur and glory which awaits us all - if we wish - by means of the Inspiration which some of us receive from on high. 
John Ruskin has truly said: "All great Art is the expression of man's delight in God's work, not in his own"; and that: "Noble Art is nothing less than the expression of a great soul; and great souls are not common things". Just so; we must rise above the common things of the material worlds, for by doing so we obtain glimpses of the higher. By means of this we shall elevate our Higher Minds with the assistance of the contemplation of Beauty, so that we are truly prepared to enter and enjoy our heritance. When Eugène Ysaÿe, the great Belgian violinist, lay dying, his last words were: "Oh, the lovely music!" He returned at that moment to the Realms of Melody, from which he had been exiled for a while in order to inspire mankind and raise it up by the Magic of his great interpretative Art. His work done, he returned to his own people in splendour and happiness to gather his eternal reward. He was one of the 30,000 Sons of Light about whom we have told you before; a similar number being always on earth in order to spread - by the great Mercy and Goodness of the Holy Ones - a Light around them to illuminate the Shadow-Realm we call Earth; peopled with Shadows like you and I, having no existence except in the nature of our material senses.......if we belong to the unevolved; and apprehending the Luminosity of the Higher Worlds only when we are ready for that great felicity. Thus the Sons of Light come down to us to deliver their divine Message. We see deaf Beethoven pouring out his Inspiration in symphonies, concertos, sonatas, which he can never hope to hear; blind Milton giving of his great inspired wisdom and attunement with the Divine, describing Paradise, in words he can never hope to read. In spite of their handicaps they must give vent to the urge of Beauty, each in his own way; both inspired from above. 
Whether painter or poet, sculptor or musician, the ideal to them is the real; for it is of their world they speak unto us. It is the duty of Art not to waste its high capabilities in the imitation of what is trivial, and in the curious adornment of what has only a finite significance. The highest Art is always the most religious; and the greatest artist is always a devout man. Who could conceive a Leonardo da Vinci, a Raphael, a Rembrandt as a scoffer, a sneerer or an unbeliever? Such is impossible to imagine, and this law applies to all great souls; whether they are aware of it or not; behind their outer activities is hid the inner sense that tells them ever of their high descent. 
Lavater has said that; "The enemy of Art is the enemy of nature. Art is nothing but the highest sagacity and exertion of human nature". This is true; only, true Art reaches out far beyond human nature. 
Art has the power to exercise and gratify the nobler and better parts of human nature, the imagination and the judgement, love of emotion and power of reflection, the enthusiasm and the critical faculty, the senses and the reason. For without any of these — and especially the higher emotions, whatever their form or nature - the study of the Occult or of Mysticism is so much waste of time, for the true secrets can never be revealed to the man whose nature is cold and critical only. Such a one belongs to the material, intellectual world, and the Book of Wisdom will be to him a sealed Tome, for its seals can be melted only by the warmth of the flame of Inspiration and Enlightenment, love of Beauty and Goodness, and by attunement with the Effulgence that descends from the Realms where these Blessings are enthroned in lustrous Splendour. 
The illimitable powers of Seership are but the outer hem of God's great Mantle of Inspiration; and all inspired artists are true Seers, for they behold that refulgence, brilliance and beaming celestial bliss that is unseen by the rest of mankind; and each gives it form and shape in his own manner, or he pours it out in melodious phrases, or exultant, stately consonance of musical harmony. 
Art may be symbolical of many things and conceptions. Gothic art is imitational, Greek inventional and Byzantine composite. Ancient Egyptian art is thoughtful, mystical and allegorical, enshrining the highest Truths in emblematical form, expressed through harmonious proportion, stylization and radiant colour. The Assyrian is highly occult and quaint to modern eyes; it is more primitive, but also more symbolical. Greek revels in noble sweeping curves and in fretted foliage, highly conventionalised. Oriental art is enriched and idealised by fancy; and though Ruskin declares that it has lost its symbolic character, he only states this because he is no Occultist and cannot interpret the signs; it shows harmony and a sweet grace in every line. The Etruscan is rude and Asiatic, with Greek luxuriance. The Roman is strong and vigorous, leafy, luxurious and voluptuous. The Byzantine is barbarian, richly knotted, linked and studded with embroidery. The Moorish is the poetry of geometry and mathematics of colour, varied and changeful as nature. The Gothic is nature subdued, and limited by rules and space. The Indian is varied, strange in its blendings and studied intermixtures, each carrying a message to him who can read the enigma; it is also arranged by the instincts of men of a hot climate. The Persian is the most graceful and poetical of all Oriental work; gorgeous and yet delicate in colour, it is full of the broadest effects of contrasting hues, and wreathed and blossomed with threads of flowers, bright as those of a missal. In the harmonies of dyes there are invention and imagination. 
When we consider Art or the Arts from a wider viewpoint and include the arts of philosophy and science, we shall find that whereas today we have four different roads that lead to the Higher Realms, i.e., art, philosophy, science and religion, in ancient India, Egypt and Greece there were lengthy periods of time when these four roads were combined into One, under the aegis of the Priesthood. There was also the great Art of Alchemy, and it was Diocletian especially who burned whole libraries of works upon the "Secret arts", and not a single manuscript treating of the art of making gold and silver escaped the fury of this brute tyrant. The arts had attained such a development during the so-called 'archaic' ages that we learn through Champollion that Athothi, the supposed second King of the First Dynasty, wrote a work on Anatomy, and the King Necho on Astrology and Astronomy. Blantasus and Cynchrus were two learned geographers of those pre-Mosaic days. 
Aelian speaks of the Egyptian Iachus, whose memory was venerated for centuries for his wonderful achievements in medicine. He stopped the progress of several epidemics, merely with certain fumigations. A work of Apollonides, surnamed Orapios, is mentioned by Theophilus, patriarch of Antioch, entitled the 'Divine Book', and giving the secret biography and origin of all the Gods of Egypt; and Ammianus Marcellinus speaks of a secret work in which was noted the precise age of the bull Apis a key to many a mystery and cyclic calculation. What has become of all these books, and who knows the treasures of learning they may have contained? We know but one thing for certain, and that is, that Pagan and Christian Vandals destroyed such literary treasures wherever they could find them; and that the Emperor Alexander Severus went all over Egypt to collect the sacred books on mysticism and mythology, pillaging every temple; and old as were the Egyptians in arts and sciences claimed a priority of antiquity as well as of learning over them; as well they might, for they were known in India at the earliest dawn of history. We also know that Plato learnt more secrets in Egypt than he was allowed to mention; and that, according to Champollion, all that was really good and scientific in Aristotle's works so prized by modern inductionists is due to his divine Master; and that, as a logical sequence, Plato having imparted the profound secrets he had learnt from the Priests of Egypt to his initiated disciples orally — who in their turn passed it from one generation to another of Adepts — the latter know more of the occult powers of nature than our scientists and philosophers of today. 
During the 19th Century, Mariette Bey excavated statues of wood and other relics at the foot of the pyramids, which show that long before the period of the first dynasties the Egyptians had attained to a refinement and perfection which is calculated to excite the wonder of even the most ardent admirers of Grecian art. Bayard Taylor, who described these statues in one of his lectures, said that the beauty of the heads, ornamented with eyes of precious stones and copper eyelids, is unsurpassed. 
Nearly 700 years B.C., in the schools of Thales and Pythagoras, was taught the doctrine of the motion of the earth, its form, and the whole heliocentric system. But in 317 A.D., we find Lactantius, the preceptor of Crispus Caesar, son of Constantine the Great, teaching his pupil that the earth is a plane surrounded by the sky, which is composed of fire and water, and warning him against the heretical doctrine of the Earth's globular form!! The wonder of this is that Lactantius still had some sort of muddled idea that there is fire (of a sort) in the 'air'. 
Servius (as well as other writers) says: "The first inhabitants of the earth never carried fire to their altars, but by their prayers they brought down the heavenly fire. Prometheus discovered and revealed to man the art of bringing down lightning; and by the method which he taught them, they brought down fire from the region above”. The King-Philosopher Numa, so renowned for his esoteric learning, had, according to the old historians, a knowledge in natural physics that was remarkable. Traditions tell that he was initiated by the Priests of the Etruscan divinities, and instructed by them in the secret of forcing Jupiter, the Thunderer, to descend upon Earth. Ovid shows that Jupiter Elicius began to be worshipped by the Romans from that time. 
Salverte is of the opinion that before Franklin discovered his refined electricity, Numa had experimented with it most successfully, and that Tullus Hostilius was the first victim of the dangerous 'heavenly guest' recorded in history. Titus Livy and Pliny narrate that this Prince, having found in the 'Books of Numa' instructions on the secret sacrifices offered to Jupiter Elicius, made a mistake, and, in consequence of it, "he was struck by lightning and consumed in his own palace". 
Next week we shall continue our discussions on the Arts. This lecture completes another step forward, and if there are any questions we shall be glad to hear from you. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
