SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 36. 
1 
Dear Disciple, 
Thoth of Memphis, the Greek Hermes, and the Latin Mercury, are three distinct individuals, although some writers especially Masons have tried to identify them with Enoch. But although the three first named were separate personalities, or symbols if you like, all belong to the same category of sacred writers, of Initiators and Recorders of Occult and Ancient Wisdom. Those who in the Koran are generically termed the Edris, or the 'Learned', the Initiated, bore in Egypt the name of "Thoth', the inventor of Arts, Sciences, of writing or letters, of Music and Astronomy. Among the Jews, Edris became 'Enoch', who, according to Bar-Hebraeus, "was the first inventor of writing", books, arts and Sciences, the first who reduced to a system the progress of the Planets. In Greece he was called Orpheus, and thus changed his name with every nation. The number seven being attached to, and connected with, each of those primitive Initiators, as well as the number 365, of the days of the year, astronomically, it identifies the mission, character, and the sacred office of all these men, but certainly not their personalities. 
Khanoch, or Hanoch, or Enoch esoterically, means the 'Initiator' and "Teacher', as well as Enos, the 'Son of Man'. In Genesis 4:26, it says: "And to Seth, to him also there was born a son; and he called his name Enos; then began men to call upon the name of the Lord". Please consider the last part of this sentence. Enoch is called the seventh Patriarch but Enos, Enosh, or Anosh, son of Seth, was sovereign Prince and Grand Pontiff; and he first distributed alms among the poor. He established also public tribunes for the administration of justice throughout the lands subject to his pontificature. He is also said to have been the first who planted palms and distributed dates; but this must have symbolic reference to his Messianic character, as palms are mentioned by his predecessor in the Apocalypse. Nimrod, not knowing that the Enos, or Enoch, who is said truly to have belonged to the line of Kain, was in reality Enoch, the Prophet-Messenger, speaks of his kingdom, which, by a wonderful guess at truth, he identifies with Atlantis. The Egyptians, he says, commemorated the magnificence of Enochia in their legend of Atlantis. That settlement was founded before the great deluge by Euanor (the Man of Hou or God), and his wife, Leucippa (the luminous mare). Enoch was afterwards called Neptune by the ignorant, because he was not only the Prophet of the flood, but was superstitiously regarded as the author of it. He was the Ganymede whom God took to Heaven, and who after his translation became the Flood-star Aquarius, by whose influences the submersion of Atlantis was supposed to have been occasioned, and who causes the inundations of the Nile by the motion of his gigantic feet (Pindar; Fragments). He was Og, the giant, who waded through the waters of the flood, and closed the windows of the firmament with his hand, and the doors of the great deep with his foot. The last syllable of Enoch's name is Og, or Ochus, meaning water, as ogha does in Sanskrit. In reality Enoch is the Second Messenger from God to Man. He is called the Prophet, because he first made known to the Initiated in the Mysteries the terrible convulsion which buried Atlantis at the bottom of the sea. Orpheus is the possessor of the Phorminx, the seven-stringed lyre, which is the sevenfold Mystery of Initiation. Thoth, with the seven-rayed Solar Discus on his head, travels in the Solar boat (the 365 degrees), jumping out every fourth (leap) year for one day. Finally, Thoth-Lunus is the septenary God of the seven days, or the week. Esoterically and spiritually, Enoichion means the 'Seer of the Open Eye'. The story about Enoch, told by Josephus namely, that he had concealed his precious Rolls or Books under the pillars of Mercury or Seth, is the same as that told of Hermes, the 'Father of Wisdom', who concealed his Books of Wisdom under a pillar, and then discovering the two pillars of stone, found the Science written thereon. As Josephus writes history, therefore, with the exception of the application made of it, it must be true allegorically. According to his version, the famous pillars were entirely covered with hieroglyphics, which, after their discovery, were copied and reproduced in the most secret corners of the inner temples of Egypt, and thus became the source of its Wisdom and exceptional learning. 

These two "pillars", however, are the prototypes of the two "tables of stone" hewn by Moses at the command of the "Lord", hence, in saying that all the great Adepts and Mystics of antiquity such as Orpheus, Hesiod, Pythagoras and Plato - got the elements of their Theology from those hieroglyphics, he is right in one sense and wrong in another. The secret teachings tell us that the Arts, Sciences, Theology and especially the Philosophy of every nation which preceded the last universally known, but not Universal, deluge, had been recorded ideographically from the primitive oral records of the fourth Race, and that these were the inheritance of the latter from the early Third Root Race before the allegorical Fall. Hence, also, the Egyptian pillars, the tablets and even the "White porphyry stone" of the Masonic legend — which Enoch, fearing that the real and precious secrets would be lost, concealed before the Deluge in the bowels of the Earth simply the more or less symbolical and allegorical copies from the primitive records. The 'Book of Enoch' is one of such copies, and is, moreover, a Chaldean, and now very incomplete, compendium. 

The Lemuro-Atlanteans built cities and spread Civilisation. Not only were Lemuria and Atlantis Continents during the early geological periods, but they contained men and civilised nations, not Palaeolithic savages only. These men under the guidance of their Divine Rulers, built large cities, cultivated Arts and Sciences, and knew Astronomy, Architecture and Mathematics to perfection. The primeval civilisation of the Lemurians did not, as one may think, immediately follow their physiological transformation. Between the final physiological evolution and the first city built, many hundreds of thousands of years had passed. Nevertheless, we find the Lemurians in their sixth sub-race building their first rock-cities out of stone and lava. 
One of these great cities of primitive structure was built entirely of lava, some thirty miles West from where Easter Island now stretches its narrow strip of sterile ground, and was totally destroyed by a series of volcanic eruptions. The oldest remains of Cyclopean buildings were all the handiwork of the last sub-races of the Lemurians; and an Occultist, therefore, shows no surprise on learning that the stone relics which were found on the small piece of land now called Easter Island by Captain Cook, are "Very much like the walls of the Temple of Pachacamac or the ruins of Tiahuanaco in Peru", and also that they are in the “Cyclopean style”. 
The writer of this lecture possesses a small head, about nine inches high, hewn out of lava, and found in Peru. This is a Lemurian piece of sculpture, probably brought many hundreds of thousands of years ago to South America from Lemuria; and it may have been worshipped there as a God, for the psychic vibrations and influences of it are tremendous. The type of features and the technique of the sculptor are exactly the same as the Easter Island statues called "Moai" transported to England in 1868 by the crew of the English ship HMS Topaze, and now, we understand, in Hall 24 of the British Museum. If you are in London at any time you should visit these statues and place your hand on them for a few moments (provided the attendant is not lurking in a dark corner ready to pounce on you!), stilling your inner senses at the same time, or making yourself passive and receptive. You will then feel immediately a very strong and strange vibration going up your arm; and if you are sensitive enough you may obtain glimpses of Lemuria and its peoples as they were; and you will witness some weird scenes, as you may well imagine! The small head referred to above has the same effects; it is a unique way to learn history, and see for yourself what the world was like a million years ago and more. After that no one can teach you anything about such things any more. 
Some people can throw back their minds into the past without the help of any objects; and one of these was the 19th Century author, Sir Henry Rider Haggard, who probably did it quite unconsciously. In several of his novels he gives absolutely correct descriptions of men and conditions as they were immense periods of time ago; even the peculiar style of thought and speech is faithfully reproduced at times; a very remarkable phenomenon. If you can obtain these books (and they should not be expensive), they are well worth reading. 
In one of the great Occult Books of India occurs the following paragraph; "The Fourth Race had its periods of the highest civilisation. Greek and Roman and even Egyptian civilisations are nothing compared to the civilisations that began with the Third Race” (after the separation of the male and female principles). 
Hermetic Philosophy is regarded by both Churchmen and men of Science from two quite opposite points of view. The former may call it sinful and devilish; the latter may deny point-blank its authenticity, notwithstanding the evidence brought forward by the most erudite men of every age, including our own. The learned Father Kircher, for instance, was not even noticed; and his assertion that all the fragments known under the titles of works by Mercury Trismegistus, Berosus, Pherecydes of Syros etc., were rolls that had escaped the fire which devoured 100,000 volumes of the great Alexandrian library, the "marvel of the ages", was simply laughed at. Nevertheless, the educated classes of Europe knew then, as they do now, that that famous library was founded by Ptolemy Philadelphus; that numbers of its manuscripts had been carefully copied from hieratic texts and the oldest parchments, Chaldean, Persian, Phoenician etc., and that these transliterations and copies amounted, in their turn, to another 100,000 rolls, as Josephus and Strabo assert. There is also the additional evidence of Clemens Alexandrinus, that ought to be credited to some extent. Clemens testified to the existence of an additional 30,000 volumes of the Books of Thoth, placed in the library of the tomb of Osymandias, over the entrance of which were inscribed the words; "A cure for the Soul". 
The forty-two sacred books of the Egyptians, mentioned by Clemens as having existed in his time, were but a portion of the Books of Hermes. Iamblichus, on the authority of the Egyptian priest Abammon, attributes 1,200 of such books to Hermes, and Manetho 36,000. But the testimony of Iamblichus as a Neoplatonist and Theurgist is of course generally rejected by modern 'critics'. Manetho, who is held by Bunsen in the highest consideration as a "purely historical personage", with whom "none of the later native historians can be compared", suddenly becomes a pseudo-Manetho, as soon as the ideas propounded by him clash with the scientific prejudices against Magic and the Occult knowledge claimed by the ancient priests. However, none of the Archaeologists doubt for a moment the almost incredible antiquity of the Hermetic books. "Styli and inkstands were found on monuments of the Fourth Dynasty”, says Bunsen. If the eminent Egyptologist rejects the period of 48,863 years before Alexander, to which Diogenes Laertius carries back the records of the priests, he is more embarrassed with the ten thousand astronomical observations, and remarks that: "if they were actual observations, they must have extended over 10,000 years. We learn however", he adds, "from one of their own chronological works.... that the genuine Egyptian traditions concerning the mythological period treated of myriads of years." 
After having devoted their whole lives to the study of the records of the old Egyptian Wisdom, both Champollion-Figeac (1778-1867) and his younger brother, Jean-François Champollion (1790-1832), the famous decipherer of Egyptian hieroglyphs, declared publicly, notwithstanding many biased judgements hazarded by certain hasty and unwise critics, that the 'Books of Hermes' truly contain a mass of Egyptian traditions which are constantly corroborated by the most authentic records and monuments of Egypt of the hoariest antiquity". 
We shall conclude our discussions on Art next week. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
