SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 42. 

Dear Disciple, 
From the foregoing lectures you will have gathered that the main purpose of Life, from the lowest forms to the highest is: EVOLUTION. Everything in life, organic, mental and spiritual, must evolve, or die. There cannot be any question about this self-evident fact. The only part that might be questioned is Spiritual Evolution; for it could be argued that as the 'Spirit' is Life in Perfection, there being nothing higher than spirit known to man if man should really know what Spirit is this spirit cannot evolve any higher, for there can be nothing more perfect than perfection. But this is only partly true; for the spirit of man enters into incarnation in the material realms for the sake of experience. Why this is so will become clearer in time, if it should happen that any of our students have not yet realised this Truth; which is very unlikely. We must also remember that there are seven spiritual realms of which the Earth is the lowest. The four lowest of these Spiritual Realms are definitely mixed up with the material as we know it. But there are three Spiritual Realms above these four as we told you; each succeeding Realm being of a higher spiritual nature than the one below it. 
When we consider mental evolution, one of the greatest departments of this comes under the heading of Philosophy. Has there been any evolution in Philosophy, making it more perfect than it was, say 2,500 years ago? We must try to find an answer to this question by making a short survey of the Philosophical Systems of the ancient Greeks up till today. During this and the next three lectures we shall mention some of the great philosophers of this period, and, if you wish to do so, you cannot do better than to procure their works, or some of them. It is not necessary for you to do so though; we only suggest this in case there are some outstanding authors in the coming series of four lectures who might appeal to you so strongly for one reason or another that you may want to know more about their writings. If this happens it often means that there exists some sort of bond between you and the thoughts and teachings of these great men; and it is always wise and well to follow up such intuitions. 
Aristotle tells us that the founder of Ionic physical philosophy, and therefore the founder of Greek Philosophy, was Thales of Miletus. Diogenes Laertios states that Thales was born in the first year of the thirty-fifth Olympiad (640 B.C.) and his death occurred in the fifty-eighth Olympiad (548–545 B.C.). He attained note as a scientific thinker and was regarded as the founder of Greek Philosophy because he discarded mythical explanations of things, and asserted that a physical element, water, was the first principle of all things. There are various stories of his travels, and in connection with accounts of his travels in Egypt he is credited with introducing into Greece the knowledge of Geometry. Tradition also claims that he was a statesman, and as a practical thinker he is classed as one of the seven wise men. It is said that he stated that the earth floats on water. But this is a distortion of his teachings, the truth being that he observed that the nourishment of all things is moist, and that heat itself is generated and kept alive by moisture. And that from which all things are generated is just what he meant by this first principle. Thales represented this fluid cosmic matter as in continuous self-motion. He advocated, like his followers, the so-called hylozoistic theory, which represents matter as eo ipso (by, or from itself) moving, and on that account animated, and he ascribed a soul to the magnet or lodestone, or magnetic oxide of iron. Now there is more in these statements than appears on the surface, and we want you to look up again our previous lectures (Numbers 40, 5, and 4 in this Grade) in which we referred to attraction and repulsion, affinity and so on, and compare these theories with the attraction of the magnet to the magnetic pole, and the 'self-moving' principle inherent in water! 
If we regard Thales as the first Greek physicist, we meet the first Greek metaphysician in the person of his somewhat younger countryman, Anaximander (610-546 B.C.). His answer to the question concerning the constitution of the Universe is already to be essentially distinguished, in its contents as well as in its fundamentals, from that of Thales. Thales had sought to find the cosmic matter in the empirically known, and had seized upon what appears as the most completely mutable. If Anaximander was not content with this theory, it was on account of his pronounced principle that the cosmic matter must be thought of as infinite, so that it may not be thought to exhaust itself in its creations. From this it followed immediately that the cosmic matter cannot be found among empirically given forms of matter, all of which are limited. Thus there remained for the definition of the cosmic matter only the quality of its spatial and temporal infinity. 
Thales said that all things are full of Gods, and he viewed the soul as something having the capacity to set up movement, which is true, of course, if you regard the word 'soul' as our 'Higher Mind'. Thales stated that the 'First Cause' is immovable; by this he meant to convey that it is placed in the centre of a Universe, from which it radiates outwards to the limits of each separate Universe. He knew the causes of eclipses and taught that the earth is spherical in form and in the midst (not the centre) of our Universe. He called plants 'living animals'; in other words: he recognised the vital principle dwelling in them. He stated that the Mind in the Universe is God, and the All is endowed with soul and is full of spirits; while its divine moving power pervades the elementary 'water'. 
Anaximander, on the other hand, called that 'water' the "Boundless", which was the first element and principle of the things that are. He was the first Greek Philosopher to make use of this term in describing the First Principle. He said it is neither water nor any of the other elements now recognised, but some other and different natural body which is boundless; and from it arise all the heavens and all the worlds which they contain. Both were right: for we have here only a difference in terms; both were talking about the same principle in reality. From the First Cause all the different elements were separated by eternal movement. This is why Aristotle compares him to Anaxagoras. Anaximander said that the opposites inhering in the substratum, which is a boundless body, are separated out; and the 'opposites' are, hot and cold, moist and dry, etc. Therefore there is no first principle to the boundless but it is rather the first principle of other things. And it encompasses all things and rules all things, in addition to the Boundless, some other cause such as 'reason', or 'love'. And this is divine, for it is deathless and indestructible. He said that cosmic matter in perpetual transformation creates out of itself world-systems, and again absorbs them, thus conforming to the Oriental Teachings which had reached Egypt, where this philosopher studied for some time in the Mystery Schools. Many of his statements, like those of the other ancient philosophers, must be taken allegorically, for neither he nor they were permitted to reveal the inner Teachings. 
We must now turn back from the metaphysical to the physical point of view when we pass from Anaximander to Anaximenes (585 B.C. - 528 B.C.); for the latter sought the cosmic matter again in the empirically known. Nevertheless, the reflections of Anaximander were not ineffective upon his successor. For when he substituted air in place of the water of Thales, he had especial reference to the postulate of Anaximander; he explained that the air is the first principle. He agreed with Anaximander that the substance of matter was one and boundless; but he did not agree with him in holding that it was indeterminate; for this reason he stated that it was air. But it differs in rarity and density with different things. When it is very attenuated fire arises; when it is condensed wind, then cloud, when more condensed, water, earth, stones; and other things come from these. He too holds the movement eternal by which the changes arise. In other words, he taught that rarefaction is identical with increase of warmth, condensation with increase of cold. 
With the destruction of Miletus after the Battle of Lade (494 B.C.) and the fall of the independence of Ionia, the first development of Greek Science along the lines of natural philosophy came to an end. When, at least a generation after Anaximenes, in another Ionian city, Ephesus, the great scientific theory of Heraclitus appeared, the new theory did not leave the old theory unused. Heraclitus (535-475 B.C.), on the other hand, joined the old theory of religious and metaphysical problems which had appeared in the meantime in other directions. After the Milesian School we should consider the Eleactic School and the metaphysical conflict between them and Heraclitus. 
First we have Xenophanes (flourished about 530 B.C.) and some of his dicta. In the 'Fragments' we find the following among others: 
"There is one God, supreme among gods and men; resembling mortals neither in form or mind". 
"The whole of Him sees, the whole of Him thinks, the whole of Him hears." 
"Without toil he rules all things by the power of His mind”. 
"And he stays always in the same place, nor moves at all; for it is not seemly that he wander about now here, now there". 
"But mortals fancy gods are born, wear clothes, and have voice and form like themselves". 
"Yet if oxen and lions had hands, and could paint with their hands, and fashion images, as men do, they would make the pictures and images of their gods in their own likeness; horses would make them like horses, oxen like oxen". 
"Aethiopians make their gods black and snub-nosed, Thracians give theirs blue eyes and red hair”. 
Upon Empedoclus remarking to him that it was impossible to find a wise man he replied; "Very likely; it takes a wise man to know a wise man when he finds one". 

Xenophanes taught that a mixture of land and sea came into being, and that in course of time this was resolved into its parts under the influence of the moist element. And he adduces such proofs as these: Fossils are found in the midst of the land and on mountains; and in the quarries of Syracuse the imprints of a fish and of seals have been found; and at Paros the imprint of a sardine deep in stone; and at Malta traces of all sorts of things of the sea. And he says that these are made when, long ago, all things were mud, and the imprint was dried in the mud. And when the earth, having sunk in the sea, becomes mud once more, all men will disappear. Then a new creation will begin. And this change happens to all worlds. 
From our previous studies you will know that he was not so far out in his reasoning. 
Next we have the fragments of Parmenides, about 495 B.C. 'On Truth' contains the following: 
"Listen, and I will instruct thee and thou, when thou hearest, shall ponder What are the sole two paths of research that are open to thinking? One path is: That Being doth be, and Non-Being is not: this is the way of conviction, for Truth follows hard in her footsteps". 
"The other path is: That Being is not, and Non-Being must be; this one, I tell thee in Truth, is an all-incredible pathway". 
"For thou never canst know what is not (for none can conceive it), nor canst thou give it expression, for one thing are Thinking and Being". 
Parmenides seems to have grasped the unity as a formal cause, Melissus of Samos (flourished about 500 B.C.), as a material cause. Accordingly the former holds it to be bounded, the latter to be boundless. 
Xenophanes, the first of these men to assert this unity, Parmenides being generally spoken of as his disciple, made nothing very clear, and does not seem to have reached either of the above views of nature; but, gazing up into the broad heavens, he simply declared: "The ONE is GOD". 
Zeno (about 465 B.C.) is the next on our list. To give a few short quotations, he says: "If that which is, had no magnitude it could not even be. That which has neither magnitude, thickness, or bulk could not be at all. For, were it added to anything else that is it would not make it one whit larger, for it is impossible to increase the magnitude of anything by adding that which has no magnitude". 
If the absolute unit is indivisible it would be, according to Zeno, nothing at all. For that which neither makes anything larger by its addition, nor makes anything smaller by its subtraction, is not one of the things that are. We shall see later on what Hermes teaches about this!! Zeno states further that if Space is, it will be in something; and to be in something is to be in Space. Space then will be in Space, and so on ad infinitum. Therefore Space does not exist. 
In the 'Parmenides' Zeno is represented as reading his work to Socrates and a few others. Before the conclusion of the reading Parmenides enters. After Zeno has finished reading a discussion ensues, part of which we quote here, Socrates is speaking: 
"In all that you say, Zeno, have you any other purpose except to disprove the being of the many? And is not each division of your treatise intended to furnish a separate proof of this, there being in all as many proofs of the not-being as you have composed arguments? Is that your meaning, or have I misunderstood you?" 
"No", said Zeno, "you have correctly understood my general purpose". 
"I see, Parmenides", said Socrates, "that Zeno would like to be with you not only in friendship but your second self in his writings too; he puts what you say another way, and would fain make believe that he is telling us something which is new. For you, in your poems, say, The All is one, and of this you adduce excellent proofs; and he on the other hand says, There is no many; and on behalf of this he offers overwhelming evidence. You affirm unity, he denies plurality. And so you deceive the world into believing that you are saying different things when really you are saying much the same. This is a strain of art beyond the reach of most of us". 
We will leave the argument here and continue the subject in our next lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
