
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 45. 
Dear Disciple, 
We now come to the last lecture on Philosophy in this Grade, and we must deal with what is called 'Modern Philosophy', giving a short survey of some of the personalities who represent it. The plain man, and even the thinking man whose thought has travelled along other than philosophical channels, are apt to disclaim any ability to understand the subject; and beneath the disclaimer often lurks a doubt whether the subject is worth understanding. The comparison of the philosopher to a "blind man in a dark coal cellar trying to find a black cat which isn't there" represents the opinion of many who in their own departments are by no means 'low-brows'. Yet philosophy is in fact only the attempt to think rigorously and consistently about the world and all its phenomena, a world which undeniably is there..... or seems to be! It is urged that these problems are already dealt with by Science, but the reply is that all the special sciences sooner or later reach a point, each in its own sphere, where the investigator cannot achieve significant and conclusive results unless he is something more than a specialist. This is very apparent today, although it is not always recognised. In the past it was not so, as you have seen in our previous lectures. The physicist, investigating the ultimate constitution of matter in the dim light of the laws of his science, finds the entities with which he deals behaving in a way no longer amenable to those mis- understood and entirely wrong laws. In Science, there are many unexamined assumptions, which it is the duty of the philosophers to examine..... if only they know the true laws!! And to examine does not necessarily mean to reject, but it may mean to qualify. 
For a thousand years after the Schools of Athens were closed by Justinian, philosophy made no real advance, no essentially new ideas about the constitution of nature, the workings of the mind, or the ends of life were put forward. Why was this so? The answer lies in the previous sentence: the Schools of Athens were closed; the Masters withdrew; the real secrets (which already had been withdrawn gradually) were now entirely hidden; and mankind had to struggle on as best it could in the meantime; for there is a time for everything, and all things proceed in cycles of activity and rest. A certain amount of progress was to be noted in ordinary 'civilisation'; the Roman Empire was extended far beyond its ancient frontiers; and, although much ground was lost in Asia and Africa, more than the equivalent was gained in Northern Europe. Within Europe also the gradual abolition of slavery and the increasing dignity of peaceful labour gave a wider diffusion to common culture, combined with, perhaps, a larger sense of human fellowship than any but the best minds of Greece and Rome had felt. 
Also the arts of war and peace were in some ways almost revolutionised. The influence of Christianity had been credited with this progress; or, rather of Catholicism. There is a certain amount of truth in this, but it is not the whole truth. The Church entered into a heritage that she did not create; nay, in many ways she actually destroyed much of the wisdom of the Ancients, as we have explained before. The slowing down of speculation coincided with the establishment of Christianity in Athens, and none of the Schools was so set against innovation and progress as that of Epicurus, falsely supposed to have been a home of free-thought. In the last Greek system of Philosophy, Neo-Platonism, theology reigned supreme; and during the two and a half centuries of its existence no real advance on the teachings of Plotinus was made. Neo- Platonism, when first constituted had incorporated a large Aristotelian element, the expulsion of which had been accomplished by its last great master; Proclus; and Christendom took over metaphysics under what seemed a Platonic form the more welcome as Platonic philosophy gave its creeds the independent support of pure reason. This support extended beyond a future life and went down to the deepest mysteries of revealed faith. For, according to the Platonic doctrine of ideas, it was quite in order that there should be a divine unity existing independently of the three divine persons composing it; that the idea of humanity should be combined with one of the three persons; and that the same idea, being both one with and distinct from Adam, should involve all mankind in the guilt of his supposed transgression. Thus the Church started with a strong prejudice in favour of Plato, which continued to operate for many centuries, although the first great schoolman, Johannes Scotus Eriugena (815-877), incurred a condemnation for heresy by adopting the pantheistic metaphysics of Neo-Platonism. 
— 
We have only space in this lecture to refer shortly to Bruno's system of that First Matter which is the extreme antithesis of the disembodied form personified in the Prime Mover, God. Giordano Bruno (1548-1600) had learned from Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa (1401-1464) a Copernican before Copernicus to recognise the principle of Heraclitus that opposites are One; every infinitesimal part of the space- filling aether is no less the soul of the universe than the Monad of Monads itself. His theory of monads is only expounded in Bruno's Latin works, for the most part ill-written and hopelessly obscure. It seems possible that by the monads Bruno sometimes means the infinitesimal parts into which the aether of space may be divided. In reality a monad is an entity, such as an Atom, a Man, or the Ruling Spirit of a Planet, or the Hidden Logos of a whole Kosmos, or the Supreme Deity of the Universe. All the Greek thinkers, from Anaximander to Plotinus can be traced in the system of Bruno. And while he represents the philosophical Renaissance in an eminent degree, he heads the two lines of speculation which, separately or combined, run through the whole history of modern metaphysics the monistic, and what is now called the pluralistic tendency. With none of the modern philosophers, except, perhaps Hegel to some extent, have the two been perfectly balanced; and in Bruno himself the leaning is distinctly towards plurality, his Supreme Monad being a mere survival from the Neo-Platonic One. 
Francis Bacon (1561-1626) has been described as being "By profession a lawyer, by taste a scientific enquirer, by character a seeker after wealth and power, by natural genius an immortal master of words". In how far all this is correct we are not prepared to say; but we certainly hail him as a great master of wisdom. He was neither the greatest and wisest of all mankind, nor the meanest, as he has been variously described. He loved mankind and tried hard to serve it, devoting a truly philosophical intellect to that end. By reforming scientific investigation he aimed at an immense extension of man's power of nature, to be obtained by a complete knowledge of her secrets. Unfortunately, intellect alone proved unequal to that mighty task. He passes for a great upholder of the principle that truth can only be learned by experience. But his philosophy starts by setting that principle at defiance. He took all knowledge for his province but omitted from his survey the rather important subject of knowledge itself, its (known) limits and laws. 
The later Renaissance was an age of intense scientific activity, conditioned, in the first instance, by a revival of Greek learning. Already before the middle of the 16th century great advances had been made in Algebra, trigonometry, astronomy, mineralogy, botany, anatomy and physiology. Before the publication of Bacon's 'Novum Organum' in 1620, Napier (1550-1617) had invented (or rather re-discovered) logarithms, Galileo (1564–1642) was reconstituting physics, Gilbert (1544-1603) had created the science of magnetism, and Harvey (1578-1657) had discovered the circulation of the blood. These were facts that Bacon took no pains to study; he either ignored or slights or denies the work done by his illustrious predecessors and contemporaries. That he rejected the Copernican theory with scorn is an exaggeration; but he never accepted it, notwithstanding arguments that the best astronomers of his time found convincing; and the longer he lived the more unfavourable became his opinion of its merit. And it is certain that Tycho Brahe's wonderful mass of observations, with the splendid generalisations based on them by Kepler, are never mentioned in his writings. Now what really ruined Aristotelianism was the heliocentric astronomy, as Bruno perfectly saw; and ignorance of this left Bacon after all in the bonds of medieval philosophy. He especially 
hated and detested Aristotle who more particularly excited his hostility by identifying Forms with Final Causes. Bacon disliked any theory tending to glorify the existing arrangements of Nature as perfect and unalterable achievements, and in his Utopia, the 'New Atlantis' (published in 1627), there are artificial mines, producing artificial metals, plants raised without seeds, contrivances for turning one plant or tree into another, for prolonging the lives of animals after the removal of particular organs, for making “a number of kinds of serpents, worms, flies, fishes of putrefaction; whereof some are advanced to be perfect creatures like beasts or birds"; with flying machines, submarines, and perpetual motions—in short, a general anticipation of Jules Verne and H.G. Wells as well as many of the discoveries of modern Science. 
The classic revival of the Renaissance did not bring back the Greek spirit of moderation. On the contrary, the new world, the new astronomy, the new monarchy, and the new religion combined to create such a sense of power, in contradistinction to Act, as the world had never known before. For us this new feeling has received its most triumphant artistic expression from Shakespeare to Milton, for France from Rabelais, for Italy from Ariosto to Michelangelo. In philosophy Bacon strikes the same note when he values knowledge as a source of power-knowledge which for Greek philosophy meant rather a lesson in self-restraint (the Ancient Wisdom!) And this idea receives a further development from Bacon's chief successor in English Philosophy, Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679), in whose system love of power figures as the very essence of human nature, the self-conscious manifestation of that Motion which is the real substance of the physical world. Hobbes shares with Bacon the belief that all knowledge comes from experience, besides making it clearer than his predecessor that experience of the world comes through external sense alone. Here there can be no claim to originality, for more than one School of Greek Philosophy has said the same. As an element of subsequent thought, more importance belongs to the idea of power which was to receive its full development from Spinoza; but only in association with other ideas derived from the philosopher Descartes, the founder of the so- called 'modern metaphysics', which has in reality no connection with true metaphysics at all. 
The principal Metaphysicians were Descartes (1596-1650), Malebranche (1638-1715), Spinoza (1632-1677), and Leibnitz (1646-1761). Their various theories will be developed, criticised and classified in our later lectures. 
Another branch of European Philosophy consisted of Epistemology, or the theory of knowledge, which is chiefly concerned with the nature and scope (limitations) of knowledge, which, however, did not originate in modern times. Among the Greeks it goes back, at least, to Empedocles, and it figures largely in the programmes of the later Schools. The modern Epistemologists were mainly represented by Locke, Berkeley, Hume and Kant. 
John Locke (1632-1704) is memorable not only for his services to speculation but for the example of a genuinely philosophic life entirely devoted to truth and good a character in which personal sweetness, simplicity and charm were combined with strenuous, disinterested and fearless devotion to the State. 

George Berkeley (1684-1753) was born and educated in Ireland. His great work, 'Principles of Human Knowledge', was published in 1710 (after the 'New Theory of Vision' in 1709), to be followed in 1713 by the more popular 'Dialogues'. At 29 his work was done, and although he lived 40 years longer, rising to be a Bishop in the Irish Church, after projecting a Christian Utopia for the civilisation of the North American Indians that never came to anything and practising "Every virtue under heaven", he made no other permanent contribution to thought. 
David Hume (1711-1776) was one whom German criticism has recognised as the greatest of all British Philosophers. His great work, the Treatise on Human Nature' (published in 1739), was written during a stay in France, between the ages of 23 and 26. Such maturity of thought, so early reached, is without parallel in history. His 'History of England' proved a source of fame and profit. Hume's philosophy is best understood when we consider it as, in the first place, a criticism of Berkeley, just as Berkeley's had been a criticism of Locke. 
Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) was born at Königsberg (modern Kaliningrad) in the former East Prussia, where he spent his whole life, holding a chair at the University from 1770 to 1797. As we shall often refer to this great man in future we will quote only one little incident relating to him in this lecture. It is told that on the day of his death a small bright cloud was seen sailing alone across the clear blue sky, and this cloud was of such a remarkable appearance that a crowd assembled on the bridge to watch it. One of them, a common soldier, exclaimed: "That is Kant's soul going to heaven!" a touching and beautiful tribute to the illustrious German, whose lofty, pure and luminous spirit it was uniquely fitted to characterise. 

Fichte, Hegel, Schelling, Schopenhauer, Friedrich Nietzsche, Ed.V. 
Hartmann and J.F. Herbart, the so-called German Idealists etc., will also be frequently referred to, and the same applies to the 'Humanists' of the 19th century, and the French Eclectics. 

Victor Cousin (1792-1867), who held his brilliant audiences spell- bound as he unrolled before them the Infinite, the Finite, and the relation between the two, little knew that France's only great philosopher since Descartes was working in obscurity among them. Auguste Comte (1798-1857), the founder of Positivism, fell early under the influence of the celebrated Henri de Saint-Simon (1760-1825), a mystical socialist, who exercised a powerful attraction on others besides Comte. Comte disliked and despised Plato, altogether preferring Aristotle to him as a philosopher; but it is fundamentally as a Platonist, not as an Aristotelian, that he should himself be classed - in this sense, that he valued knowledge above all as the means towards reconstituting society on the basis of an ideal life. And this is the first reason why his philosophy is called positive to distinguish it as reconstructive from the purely negative thought of the French Revolution. The second reason is to distinguish it as dealing with real facts from the figments of theology — as such and the abstractions of metaphysics of his contemporaries. His works are too vast to enable us to discuss them in our teachings, and, moreover, we do not agree with him at all, as his doctrines are based mainly on the Material, discarding the Spiritual, although he makes some attempts to include the Arts in his curriculum. In this latter attempt he fails completely, for he shows a deplorable lack of understanding of the true spiritual values of the Arts; brilliant as his discourses are. He tried to combine religion, philosophy, politics, sciences and the arts in his scheme for a better world, and his writings are the result of a lofty, though mistaken, Idealism, which we respect though we do not agree with it. The great idea of Comte's life, that the positive Sciences (although these are negative in actuality), philosophically systemised, are destined to supply the basis of a new religion surpassing Catholicism in its social efficacy, seems a delusion really inherited from one of his pet aversions, Plato. It arose from a profound misconception of what Catholicism had done, and a misconception, equally profound, of the means by which its priesthood worked. In spite of Comte's denials, the leverage was got not by appeals to the heart, but by appeals to that future judgement with which the preaching of righteousness and temperance was associated by St. Paul, his supposed precursor in religion, as Aristotle was his precursor in philosophy. 
John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) was, like Comte, a Platonist in the sense of valuing knowledge chiefly as an instrument of social reform. 
Mill's 'A System of Logic' (published in 1843), the most important English contribution to philosophy since Hume, is based on Hume's theory of knowledge, amended and supplemented by some German and French Ideas. In morals Mill may be considered the creator of what Henry Sidgwick (1838-1900), in his 'Methods of Ethics' (1874), called universalistic Hedonism. Mill fully sympathised with Comte's demand for social reorganisation as a means toward the moral end. But, with his English and Protestant traditions, he had no faith in the creation of a new spiritual power with an elaborate religious code and ritual as the best machinery for the purpose. In his opinion, the claims of the individual to extended liberty of thought and action, not their restriction, were what first needed attention. 
Herbert Spencer (1820-1903), at 22, accepted and summed up the policy of his uncle, Thomas Spencer, in connection with the Anti-Corn Law League, etc., under the form of a general hostility to State interference with individual liberty, supporting it by a reference to the reign of Natural Law in all orders of existence. In his first great work, 'Social Statics' (1851), the principles of laissez-faire received its full systematic development as the restriction of State action to the defence of liberty against internal and external aggression, the raising of taxes for any other purposes being unjust, as is also the private ownership of land, which is by nature the common heritage of all. Spencer subsequently came to abandon land nationalisation, probably from alarm at its socialistic implications. 
We must pass the English Hegelians and the German Eclectics here, as this lecture is already over long. 
More recent philosophy, such as that of F. H. Bradley (1846-1924), Ernest Belfort Bax (1854-1926), Henri Bergson (1859-1941), William James (1842-1910), F.C.S. Schiller (1864-1937) in England and John Dewey (1859-1952) in America; Albert Einstein (1879-1955), George Santayana (1863-1952), Bertrand Russell (1872-1970), A. N. Whitehead (1861-1947), Wittgenstein (1889-1951), Martin Heidegger (1889-1976; and so on, will be discussed or referred to occasionally in our future studies; and the same applies to the works of Ouspensky (1878-1947), whose writings are most interesting from the point of view of studying the mind of a brilliant man who makes many researches into the subjects we are interested in and comes to a great many wrong conclusions, in spite of distinct glimpses of the truth. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
