Dear Disciple, 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 43. 

We must now consider the 'Fragments' of Heraclitus (about 505 B.C.) and here we find The Word, or 'Logos'. He says; "This Word (Logos) is everlasting, but men are unable to comprehend it before they have heard it or even after they have heard it the first time. Although everything happens in accordance with this Word, they behave like inexperienced men whenever they make trial of words and deeds such as I declare, as I analyse each thing according to its nature and show what it is. But other men have no idea what they are doing when awake, just as they forget what they do when they are asleep." 
not for the In the above, we find a number of hidden Truths average 'philosopher'; but you will be able to interpret the above paragraph in the light of our previous teachings. We should like to have your interpretation when next you write to us, and make this paragraph a little exercise. 
He goes on: "One ought to follow the lead of that which is common to all men. But though the Word (Logos) is common to all, yet most men live as if each had a private wisdom of his own. Most men have no comprehension even of such things as they meet with, nor do they understand what they experience though they themselves think they do". 
That this is so you will agree; and it goes to prove that humanity of 500 B.C. was the same as it is today. Nor will it ever change, for the reason we told you before, namely that there is an unending stream of new Higher Minds coming into incarnation continually, and these have to learn all our old lessons from the very beginning. At the same time those who have gained Wisdom depart for the Higher Realms. It is just as if a pail stood under an ever running tap for endless periods. Although a quantity of water is always running over, the pail remains full of water. So it is with humanity on Earth; Earth being the 'pail' and humanity the 'water'. 
He states further; "Man is kindled and put out like a light in the night time. There await men after death things they do not expect or dream of. Right many things must men know who are lovers of wisdom. Wisdom is one thing; it is to know the thought by which all things are guided. You could not discover the boundaries of the soul though you tried every path, so deep does its reasons (Logos) reach down. (A plain allusion to the Soul and Higher Mind). One to me is as good as ten thousand if he be but the best. It is wise to hearken not to me, but to the Word (as your Hidden Masters are always telling you), and to confess that all is obvious. The immortal are mortal, the mortal immortal, each living in the other's death and dying in the other's life (this last sentence is a good theme for meditation.) Man is called a child by God, as a boy is by a man. The most beautiful ape is ugly compared with the human race. The wisest man compared with God is like an ape in wisdom, in beauty, and in everything else. It is hard to contend against the heart; for it is ready to sell the soul to purchase its desires. (An allusion to the eternal struggle between Higher and lower mind). All things flow; nothing abides. The Lord whose oracle is in Delphi neither reveals nor conceals but indicates. Eyes and ears are bad witnesses to men who have not an understanding heart". 
The advance from the speculations in nature-philosophy of the Milesians to the conceptional investigations in Being and Becoming of Heraclitus and his Eleatic opponents was the result of a re-action, which the conception of the world created by Ionian Science necessarily exerted upon the religious ideas of the Greeks. The monistic tendency which Science showed in seeking the unitary cosmic matter was in implicit opposition to polytheistic mythology, and necessarily became more and more accentuated. It was inevitable therefore, that Greek Science on the one hand should emphasise and reinforce the monistic suggestion which it found in the field of religious ideas, but on the other that it should fall so much the more into sharper opposition to the polytheism of the state religion. The imperturbable champion of this conflict, the man who stands as the religious-philosophical link between the Milesian nature philosophy and the two great metaphysical systems of Heraclitus and Parmenides, and at the same time the man who is the messenger of philosophy from the East to the West, is Xenophanes (about 530 B.C.), the rhapsodist of Colophon, who sang in Magna Graecia. To him Antiquity referred as the first champion against the anthropomorphic element in the popular religion. He criticised the representation of gods in human form, and made sport of the poets who attributed to celestials the passions and sins of men as we told you in our previous lecture. He asserted the singleness of the highest and true God. According to his religious conviction, God is the original ground of all things, and to Him are due all attributes which the physicists had ascribed to the cosmic matter. Just the same argument that goes on today. We must now leave the ancient Greek Philosophers for a while, to renew the study in our next grade. 
Primitive philosophy has served as the foundation stone for modern philosophy; only the progeny, while perpetuating the features of the external body, has lost on its way the soul and spirit of its parent. 
The Philosophers were Scientists, and philosophy was a real Science not simply verbiage, as it is in our own day. The term is composed of two Greek words ('philos' and 'sophia') whose meaning is intended to convey its secret sense, and ought to be interpreted as "wisdom of love". Now it is in the last word, "love", that lies hidden the esoteric significance; for "love" does not stand here as a noun, nor does it mean "affection", or "fondness", but it is the term used for Eros, that primordial principle in divine creation, or the abstract desire in Nature for procreation, resulting in an everlasting series of phenomena. It means "divine love", that universal element of divine omnipresence spread throughout Nature, and which is at once the chief cause and effect. The "wisdom of love" or ("philosophia") meant attraction to and love of everything hidden beneath objective phenomena and the knowledge thereof. Philosophy meant the highest Adeptship love of an assimilation with Deity. In his modesty Pythagoras even refused to be called a Philosopher (or one who knows every hidden thing in things visible; cause and effect, or absolute Truth), and he called himself simply a sage, an aspirant to Philosophy, or to the Wisdom of Love love in its exoteric meaning being as degraded by men then as it is now by its purely terrestrial application. 

Initiation, though it contained neither rules and principles, nor any special teaching of Science, as it is now understood, was nevertheless Science, and the Science of Sciences; as it is now represented by Occult Science. And though devoid of dogma, of physical discipline, and of exclusive ritual, it was yet the one true religion — that of Eternal Truth. Outwardly it was a School, a College, wherein were taught Sciences, Arts, ethics, legislation, philanthropy, the cult of the true and real nature of cosmic phenomena; secretly, during the Mysteries, practical proofs of the latter were given. Those who could learn truth on all things - i.e., those who could look the great Isis in her unveiled face and bear the awful Majesty of the Goddess - became Initiates. But the Children of the Fifth Race had fallen too deeply into matter to do so with impunity. Those who failed disappeared from the world, without leaving a trace behind. Which of the highest kings would have dared to claim any individual, however high his social standing, from the stern priests, once that the victim had crossed the threshold of their sacred Adytum? 
The noble precepts taught by the Initiates of the early Races passed to India, Egypt and Greece, to China and Chaldea, and thus spread all over the world. All that is good, noble and grand in human nature, every divine faculty and aspiration, were cultivated by the Priest-Philosophers who sought to develop them in their Initiates. 
Their code of Ethics, based on altruism, has become universal. It is found in Confucius, the 'atheist', who taught that "he who loves not his brother has no virtue in him" and it appears in the Old Testament precept: "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself". The greater Initiates became like unto Gods, and Socrates, in Plato's Phaedo, is represented as saying: "The Initiates are sure to come into the company of the Gods". In the same work the great Athenian Sage is made to say: "It is quite apparent that those who have established the Mysteries, or the secret assemblages of the Initiates, were no mean persons, but powerful genii, who from the first ages had endeavoured to make us understand under those enigmas that he who will reach the invisible regions unpurified will be hurled into the abyss (that is, he will lose his personality for ever), while he who will attain them purged of the maculations of this world, and accomplished in virtues, will be received in the abode of the Gods". 
This is true, of course, but there is one proviso which Socrates does not mention, and that is: that a failure in such cases does not necessarily mean eternal perdition, but that in almost every instance the candidate who has failed shall have another chance. 
Clemens Alexandrinus, referring to the Mysteries, said: "Here ends all teaching. One sees Nature in all things". This Christian Father of the church speaks similarly to the Pagan Pretextatus, the pro-consul of Achaia (Fourth Century A.D.), "a man of eminent virtues", who remarked that to deprive the Greeks of "the sacred Mysteries which bind in one the whole of mankind", was to render their very lives worthless to them. 
Would the Mysteries have ever obtained the highest praise from the noblest men of antiquity had they not been of more than human origin? Read all that is said of this unparalleled institution, as much by those who had never been initiated, as by the Initiates themselves. Consult Plato, Euripides, Socrates, Aristophanes, Pindar, Plutarch, Pythagoras, Iamblichus, Isocrates, Diodorus, Cicero, Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, Apuleius, and dozens of other famous Sages and writers. That which the Gods and Angels had revealed; exoteric religions, beginning with Moses, reveiled and hid for ages from the sight of the world. Joseph, the son of Jacob, was an Initiate, otherwise he would not have married Asenath (an Egyptian name meaning "gift of Isis" or "she who belongs to Isis"), the daughter of Potipherah ("Pet-ef-er-Ra", he who belongs to RA", priest of Heliopolis and Governor of On. "On" or "Anu", "the Sun", being the Egyptian name of Heliopolis, the "City of the Sun". Asenath or 'Asa-Neith' also refers to the goddess Neith, the daughter of RA, which would make Joseph her consort and a divine, rather than human personality; more of which in later Lectures. 
Natural Philosophy and Magic are one and the same thing. That it was natural, and not supernatural, and that the Ancients so regarded it is shown by what Lucian says of the "laughing philosopher", Democritus, who, he tells his readers, "Believed in no miracles)...... but applied himself to discover the methods by which the theurgists could produce them; in a word, his philosophy brought him to the conclusion that Magic was entirely confined to the application and the imitation of the laws and works of nature". 
Menander taught that the lower Angels were the emanations of Ennoia (Designing Thought). It was Ennoia who taught the Science of Magic and imparted it to him, together with the art of conquering the creative angels of the lower world. The latter stand for the passions of our lower nature, or lower mind. His pupils, after receiving baptism from him (i.e., after initiation), were said to "Resurrect from the dead" and, "growing no older", became "immortal". This "resurrection" promised by Menander meant, of course simply the passage from the darkness of ignorance into the Light of Truth, the awakening of man's immortal Spirit to inner and eternal life. This is the same as the Science of the Raja Yogis - Magic. 
Every person who has read Neo-Platonic Philosophy knows how its chief Adepts, such as Plotinus, and especially Porphyry, fought against phenomenal Theurgy. But, beyond all of them, Iamblichus, the author of the 'De Mysteriis', lifts high the veil from the real term Theurgy, and shows us therein the true Divine Science of Raja Yoga. Magic, he says, is a lofty and sublime science, Divine, and exalted above all others. 
"It is the greatest remedy for all...... It neither takes its source in, nor is it limited to, the body or its passions, to the human compound or its constitution; but all is derived by it from our upper Gods”, otherwise, our Divine Egos, which run like a silver thread from the Spark in us, through the medium of the Higher Mind, up to the primeval Divine Fire, with which our Soul is One. 
We shall continue our discussions on Philosophy next week. As this lecture completes another step in our second grade studies, you are now invited to write and report to us as usual. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
