SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 48. 

Dear Disciple, 
Among the Secret Orders that make use of symbols the Freemasons take first rank. There are for instance the three famous State Swords of the Grand lodge; all sorts of Firing-Glasses, engraved glasses and goblets (those from the Chapter of St. James No.2 being especially beautiful); the 'Antient Aprons', Rose Croix Aprons, all sorts of collar jewels and chains; the P.M. Jewels of the Gallows type; First Principal's Jewels, Royal Arch Collar Jewels, hammers, or mauls, splendidly embroidered cases, such as the case of the 'Articles of Union'; the Deacon's jewels, enamel lockets, stars, jugs, boxes, medals, Mark Jewels, engraved plate jewels, Rolls, Coats of Arms, the statuettes of the Order of Mopses, done in old Meissen china, the celebrated Gormogen Medal, of which only three copies are known; candlesticks, sand-glasses, trowels, and the usual squares, compasses, etc., etc. A goodly collection. We are not here concerned with the secret meanings of all these jewels and symbols, for we respect the secrets of others just as we trust that our own students will never reveal the real secrets of our teachings. Many renegade brothers of the Freemasons have from time to time pretended to divulge to the world at large some of the ritual, passwords, grips, etc., (as the numerous exposés of Freemasonry on television, the latest of which was broadcast in 2010, testify). There is a rare book in French, for instance, published in Amsterdam in 1745, in which the secrets of the Society of Mopses, a secret society of the early 18th century, are revealed. The founders established ceremonies, passwords, etc., and took as their emblem the Mops dog (which name is derived from the German word mops, signifying a pug dog) the symbol of Fidelity.....which in this case did not work! They had images made of wax or cloth in addition to the Lodge Dog from which the Order derived its name. We only mention this in order to show that there is nothing on Earth which cannot be used as a symbol in some way after it has been endowed with a secret meaning. 
Horns are symbolically used too, and we find them from Assyria to Egypt, from Greece to Rome, from France to Scandinavia; in short, all over the world. They appear in every imaginable form, from bird's beaks to plumes. Horns were the distinguishing mark of the Egyptian gods and goddesses; just as the kind of crest worn by an armoured knight in the days of chivalry was usually intended to denote some trait in his character, some ideal he was pursuing or to symbolise some event in his career. 
The Moon has been considered, at least by Aryan stock, as the Mother of gods and men, and her personification is distinguished by the most remarkable of her visible forms: the crescent. We find this worn as a crest upon the heads of Ishtar, Isis, Diana, Artemis, or, as at present, the Madonna. Viewed from the front, the crescent has the appearance of the horns of a short-horned cow, hence it is called the horned Moon. In this connection, Hera-lo gave her name to the Bosphorus - the passage of the cow. As very many of the symbols of classic times came from Egypt, and as the cow there was the symbol of Isis in her form as Hathor, and as the bulls Apis and Mnevis represented her consort, Osiris; therefore in many instances the horns on male personages, gods and heroes denote Osiris, or the Sun, while on females they refer to Isis, or the Moon. The idea came to Greece and Rome, which led to the placing of horns upon the head of Zeus-Jupiter, as well as the thunderbolt in his hand. Ramman, the great god of the Chaldeans, is depicted with an axe in his hand, while over his head are his symbols, the Sun and Moon, which were both attributed to him inasmuch that it was believed that he had acquired the powers of both their gods, who once separately represented them. The crescent Moon in the badge of Byzantium is the same crescent which was taken over by the Turks. 
While among all the Latin races the Moon is feminine and the Sun masculine, among Teutonic peoples, such as the modern Germans, they speak of die Sonne (feminine) and der Mond (masculine), while curiously enough we find the same genders ascribed to each among Australian aborigines. Even among the Egyptians we find several male deities, such as Thoth and Khonsu, wearing the lunar crescent as a crest. It shows once again that a symbol can have many meanings. On the head of Jupiter on an ancient gem there appears the corn-measure of Serapis, the horn of Ammon, and the ray of Phoebus, showing that in his own person he combines the powers of all three; and each of these attributes represents the Sun-God at a different season of the year. Jupiter Serapis is nearly always shown on coins and gems with the curled horns of Ammon, reminding us very much of the spiral gold ornaments worn until very recent days by Dutch peasant women, and obviously showing by their conventional curl whence the common fossil 'ammonites' take their name. Juno Sospita is twice represented by Statues in the Vatican Museum with the skin and horns of a goat on her head, precisely in the same position as those of a bison, and which once were to be seen on many North American Indian Chiefs, such as Mahtawopah, or the Blackfoot Petohpeekis. At Durban the Kaffir rickshaw men wore horns upon their heads too. There is also the horned Mercury, or the Mercury with a crescent on his head between the wings; while Bacchus (Dionysus) is commonly shown 
with the horns, indeed Horace calls him 'Bicorniger'; and Michaelangelo's Moses has two horns as of a young bull. 
In the Scriptures there are very frequent references to the lifting up or the cutting off of horns, testifying to the importance of the subject. Grotius stated that the god Mnevis, who was worshipped in Egypt, is believed to be no other than Moses himself.....which is of 
course nonsense. 
The 'Salii', called also 'Flamines martiales', priests of Mars, in ancient Rome, wore a remarkable spike or horn upon their heads, which spike was called apex. It looked somewhat like the famous 'pickelhaube' upon the helmet of pre-war German soldiers and police, and in Great Britain this emblem used to be worn in the same manner by some of the British soldiers. If the headdress of a priest of Mars should fall from his head he was considered to be dishonoured, for his horn of office was then brought low. A certain Sulpitius was deprived of his priesthood because his apex fell from his head while performing his service. As a military adornment the nations of old, Etruscans, Greeks, Belgi, Saxons, all placed horns upon their helmets, in token of victory or defiance. Later these were replaced by plumes, cockades, feathers, etc.; 'a feather in one's cap' is still a token of the reward for something creditable. But we must remember that the 'devil' is supposed to wear horns too! 
But devils, demons, satyrs and so on have had their uses also, for what are now called 'gargoyles', were once used by the Chaldeans and Assyrians in order to drive off and counteract the influence of evil spirits, who were chased away from the buildings with which they were adorned by their hideous aspects, which frightened those evil spirits! We can see these same protectors on some of our own European Churches and Cathedrals, and the gargoyles of Notre Dame of Paris are world famous. 
For the same reason we find a cock upon the highest point of sacred and other buildings, so that when the bells were silent, the devil might always see him on guard, for the cock is the enemy of the devil. To make the cock more conspicuous, he was first made to turn every way with the wind, so as to present his full form in every direction. Then, to make him still more conspicuous, he was gilded, to make him shine out brightly and defiantly. 
The connection of the devil with horns is found in the superstition that the word 'rabbit' brings bad luck when it is used, on account of his long ears which stick out like a pair of horns; hence rabbits are referred to as 'the long-eared gentry' in Devon. This applies to hares as well. "Talk about the devil, and you will see his horns", is representative of this same superstition. Although horns are most generally connected with certain honours, the Neapolitan has a certain way in which he places his hands together, by which the thumbs stand up like a pair of horns, and this is the sign for expressing stupidity, of humble submission, and of weak inferiority. The placing together and lifting up of the hands in prayer is with Christians a mark of adoration, or to offer up supplications to God. The Neapolitan does not lift up his hands but holds them downwards and towards the person he thus calls stupid. Of all expressive positions of the hand, certainly the most important, as well as the best known, is that used in the attitude of benediction by the Western Church, but now, for about a hundred and fifty years past, limited to the Pope only. 
It was once the open hand that was commonly placed upon the top of the Roman standard, and a similar hand was found at Herculaneum; and it was once upon a time mounted upon a staff, before the King of France, as the Hand of Justice. The same symbol was used as a protective amulet, and one such was found in Jebeil (Byblos) and can be seen at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford. Other Museums in various countries also possess such hands found locally. The Arabs, as all Moslems, regard the open hand as peculiarly sacred. Each digit, with them, is dedicated specially to, and is taken to personify, one of the holy family. Thus the thumb represents the prophet; the index finger is Abubaker, 1st Caliph; the middle finger, Omar, 2nd Caliph; the ring finger, Uthman, 3rd Caliph; and the little finger, Ali, 4th Caliph. The four are called 'Chakār Yarān'; the four companions (of the prophet). Among the Shia or Persian Islamic sect the thumb also represents the prophet, while the fingers are: 1st, the Lady Fatima; 2nd, Ali, her husband; 3rd Hasan; 4th Husain, sons of Fatima and Ali. 

We may accept it as certain that the open hand, whenever depicted, may be taken for the symbol of power and triumph; or, when expressing an attitude, it is the sign either of benediction or of the extreme reverence of adoration. The Lámh Dhearg Uladh the red hand of Ulster - is said to be the same as that of the Phoenicians (and the same as that of the Jews of Jerusalem). The tradition is that the Phoenicians brought it to Ireland; whence, as is well known, it has taken its place in heraldry as the special cognisance of a baronet. 
The ram, the lizard, the crocodile, the bee, the pine cone, the fig tree, are all symbols of the ancients, and so were the cornucopia of Ceres and Fortuna. 
The Thyrsus and vase were the representatives of Bacchus, the vase being that of Osiris too; while the two flutes were peculiar to Cybele, the curved, or Phrygian flute denoting the Phrygian cult of that goddess in Italy. 
Frogs, tripods, horseshoes, balances, knives, leaves, wheelcrosses (which are Sun signs), cakes, thunderbolts, disks, various fruits and corn, triangles and cymbals or crotals, and other musical instruments, were symbols of Greece and other ancient lands. Each had a special meaning, and in time to come we shall discuss them in their right place. 
On the old terracotta lamps of Greece and Rome we can find many interesting symbols; some of a very elaborate nature. 
We must end this Lecture by a short reference to the symbol of the Unicorn. Although men have often been uncertain where unicorns, or alicorns, were to be found, there has never been the same difficulty with regard to its horn. We have countless traveller's tales about natives in every wild clime who possessed these horns with their natural spiral twistings or striae (or "anfractusus spires and cochleary turnings”, according to the charming pedantic phrase of one writer). Strange to say these spirals are the same in every representation of these mythical animals in all ages. Even the horns of the unicorned animals shown in bas-relief on the walls of Persepolis show these twistings. There is nothing said about them, however in Ctesias, Solinus, Isidore, or Physiologus; aside from the mysterious passage in Aelian and a reference by Pliny, there seems to be no ancient authority for them whatever, and learned writers do not mention them until after the close of the Middle Ages; but Arabian writers had accepted them somewhat earlier. Alkazuwin says, for example, that the unicorn had one horn on its head, sharp at the top and thick below, with raised or convex striae outside and hollow or concave striae within. Arabian notions on the inside of the unicorn are highly interesting. Ibn Khordadhbeh asserts than when the horn is split longitudinally one finds inside of it, on a black background, the white figures of a man, a fish, a peacock or some other bird. Algiahid, in his 'Book of Holy Things', makes much the same remark, and Al Damirī affirms in more detail that when one cuts the horn lengthwise there are found in it various figures in white on black, as peacocks, goats, birds, certain kinds of trees, men and other things wonderfully depicted. Horns with such remarkable interior decorations were much more prized, of course, than those without them, and the Arabs tell us that a good one was worth over four thousand shekels of gold and that they were used by the Chinese mandarins on their girdles. 
The inventory of Lorenzo the Magnificent, open to the public in the Medici Museum at Florence, shows that the most precious of his possessions after the famous Tazza Farnese was his alicorn, three and one-half braccia in length and valued by him probably on the basis of what it cost him at six-thousand gold florins. About the year 1560 a group of German merchants offered a unicorn for sale in Rome and other Italian cities for ninety thousand scudi this amount then being worth about £18,000 - and finally sold it to the Pope. A horn picked up on the coast of Wales in 1588 by a poor woman was sold for a great but unspecified sum, as you may read in 'De vulgi erroribus in medicina', by Jacobus Primerosius, Amsterdam, 1639. Here we have the first clue to the myth, for the 'horn' picked up by that woman in Wales was a narwhal's tusk; although great arguments arose about it as both Pliny and Aelian had said that the true horn was black, while the tusk of a narwhal is white or yellow. Boethius de Boodt disposed of most of the horns to be seen in his time by saying that they were not of the right colour, and Amatus Lusitanus advised his readers to purchase the black variety — antelope or rhinoceros horn - when it could be had. 
Compared with the huge prices paid for these horns in the past, today's prices are certainly very low indeed, for the writer of this Lecture had a narwhal's tusk offered to him for sale, a beautiful tusk over seven feet long, for the princely sum of one pound! Sic transit. 
We shall continue our discussion on symbols next week. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
