SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 41. 

Dear Disciple, 
We are presenting to you the subject of Natural Healing, as a matter of interest, for we are of the opinion that it requires certain gifts and a definite method of attunement to make a really successful healer. We regard human life as absolutely sacred, and in this respect no risks of any kind must ever be undertaken, and when a person is obviously ill it is essential to call upon the services of a Doctor. For common ailments which occur in one's own family circle, a measure of relief can be obtained and in any case the principles underlying the treatments can be tested out, so that they can be used as supplementary methods, or in case of emergency. 
We want you to realise that, in the matter of healing, you are simply making yourself a transmitter for Cosmic Forces. You can picture yourself as being something in the nature of a radio where your lungs act as an aerial and your feet make earth contact, and unless you are able to definitely 'tune in', your measure of success will be small. 
We shall first give you the outline of some treatments you can try out on yourself. 
Exercise 1. If you have pain or discomfort in any part of your body, sit down or lie down, and thoroughly relax. Concentrate on that particular spot where the pain is, until the rest of your body has disappeared from your consciousness and you can feel every detail of the part you are concentrating on. Then take a deep breath, hold it for about a minute, and then slowly exhale. Do this three or four times and you will find considerable relief. 
The Blood is of vital importance in the maintenance of health, and by adding to the vibratory powers of the blood cells an extra amount of energy is brought to the diseased part. Whether you have a pain or not this treatment can be tested out on any part of your body. Next time you visit the dentist, we suggest you concentrate on one of your toes, so that you lose consciousness of the work in hand!! 
Exercise 2. If you have a headache or neuralgia, sit down and relax. Plant your feet firmly on the ground and then place the first two fingers of your right hand against your right temple, and the first two fingers of your left hand against your left temple. Take a deep breath, hold it and then slowly exhale. Repeat three or four times. Remain relaxed and quiet for awhile. There should be considerable relief in about 10 minutes or sooner. 
Exercise 3. If you feel devitalised, cold or are in the company of someone who has thoroughly tired you out, sit down, place your feet firmly on the ground with ankles close together. Put the tips of your ten fingers together and do the same breathing exercise as mentioned in the last treatment. In a few minutes you will notice that the palms of your hands are getting warm. When you have finished taking deep breaths, and resumed your normal breathing, continue to keep your fingers together for awhile and you will experience a considerable increase in vitality. As vital force is always leaving your body by the extremities, by putting your feet together and closing your finger terminals you prevent this force from escaping. 
Before giving treatment to other people, clear your lungs of any stale air, by means of a few good long breaths; be especially careful to exhale to the limit with a considerable amount of force. While you do this, relax mentally and endeavour to raise your consciousness away from the material world. Exercise 3 will help to make your hands more sensitive and when you feel a tingling in your fingers you are ready to start giving a treatment. 
In our lectures on the brain, we pointed out that the Sympathetic Nervous System, which is linked up with all the internal organs and blood vessels, runs along both sides of the spine. It is connected with the vertebræ by means of ganglia which, in their turn, are connected with the spinal system by means of small links or junctions called Rami. The relation between the two systems, and to what extent they influence each other, is still a matter of debate by Science. However, the Sympathetic Nervous System carries on the main functions of the body without any help from our Lower Mind, and for this reason it has often been referred to as the system working for the psychic body, and the system that can most successfully be used for carrying out 'natural healing' treatments. 
These treatments are applied direct to the ganglia between the spinal vertebræ by means of the application of the right hand to the left side of your patient at about half an inch away from the actual ganglion. In order to accurately locate the ganglia it will be necessary to understand something about the anatomy of the backbone. Nowadays there is no shortage of excellent diagrams available on the Internet which illustrate this, or, if you do not have Internet access, such diagrams can be found in medical text books such as 'Gray's Anatomy' which should not be expensive. The aim being to gain a broad understanding of the anatomy of the spine; not to become a Doctor or Surgeon! 
When a side view is taken of the spine it is seen to present a succession of curves beginning at the neck and ending at the Coccyx: a Cervical, with the convexity forwards; a Thoracic, with a convexity backwards; a Lumbar with the convexity again forwards and so on. 
In the Cervical Curve there are 7 Cervical Vertebræ. 
In the Thoracic Curve there are 12 Thoracic Vertebræ. 
In the Lumbar Curve there are 5 Lumbar Vertebræ. 
The uppermost Vertebra (1st Cervical) is known as the Atlas. It is really a ring which fits round a peg, which mechanism enables us to turn our heads from side to side. The next 4 or 5 Vertebræ are not easy to locate as they are deeply buried in the flesh; nevertheless it is possible to gauge the position of the ganglia fairly accurately and as a matter of fact we do not need to find them all. 
(1). The Superior Cervical Ganglion. This lies in the hollow between the base of the skull and the ears. 
Treatment applied here will tone up the whole system and benefit the facial muscles and arteries, the internal ear, forehead, nose and the nerves of the eyes; the carotid (7) artery (neck), the thyroid gland and the nerves controlling the muscles of the larynx and pharynx; and the gastric plexus of the stomach. This treatment will act as a general tonic at any time. Apply to the left side of the patient. 
Mat (2). The Middle Cervical Ganglion. This is slightly below the preceding one, or roughly, at the back of the neck, (half an inch to the left of the vertebra). Treatment applied here principally affects the nerves near the heart, and vitalises a good deal of the blood supply. (For pains in the chest). 
Returning to the vertebræ, we can now locate the 7th Cervical Vertebra, which is a very prominent one (Vertebra Prominens) at the back of the neck. You can feel it easily, when you bend your head forwards. This Vertebra is the last one in the Cervical Curve and the very next vertebra below is the 1st Thoracic Vertebra. 
(3). The First Thoracic Ganglion. This is situated between the 1st and 2nd Thoracic Vertebræ, half an inch to the left of the bones and may be sometimes be fused with the inferior cervical (stellate) or second thoracic ganglion. 
These nerves go to the blood supply of the abdomen, part of the stomach, kidneys and the legs. Try this for digestive troubles. 
(4). The Fifth Thoracic Ganglion. This is situated between 
the 5th and 6th Thoracic Vertebræ, (these two vertebræ are the 5th and 6th below the Vertebra Prominens), and is located roughly between the shoulder blades. It principally affects the blood supply of the lungs. (For colds etc.) 
(5). The Ninth Thoracic Ganglion. This is situated between the 9th and 10th Thoracic Vertebræ. For the nerves and blood supply of the kidneys. 
(6). The Eleventh Thoracic Ganglion. This is situated between the 11th and 12th Thoracic Vertebræ. These 
nerves all lead to the Solar Plexus which sends branches to all blood vessels and organs within the abdomen. This ganglion also affects the eyes and throat. 
The 12th Thoracic Vertebra is the last one in the Thoracic Curve and the next vertebra is the 1st Lumbar. 
(7). The Fourth Lumbar Ganglion. This is situated between 
the 4th and 5th Lumbar vertebræ, (16th and 17th below the Vertebra Prominens). This ganglion is connected with the sciatic nerves. Treatment for Sciatica. 
Method of application. 
Apply the first two fingers and the thumb of your right hand to the left side of the spine of your patient, at the spot selected. Take a deep breath, hold it as long as possible and then slowly exhale. Continue this for 2 or 3 minutes and then stop. The patient should, by this time, begin to experience a tingling sensation in the fingertips and you may also feel pins and needles in the calves of your legs or in your arms. When this happens you will know that your treatment has got through. Rest awhile and continue treatment again later, if necessary. While giving treatment, stand firmly on the ground and see that your patient does not cross either their hands or feet. 
And now we come to what is known as Absent Healing, which form of healing we are much in favour of and from which we have seen excellent results. There are two methods of procedure and their 
adoption is purely a matter of choice. The person you set out to help should, in the first place, express a desire, or petition, for help and as far as possible should co-operate with you, unless of course it is a case of severe illness. This forms a definite link and you can send out your treatment in the early hours of the night, when your patient is either asleep or in a passive condition. 
(1). Relax and raise your consciousness from mundane affairs and realise that you are offering yourself as a transmitter of Cosmic Forces. Think of the person you desire to help, if you do not know them personally you will probably get a psychic impression of them. Let your mind connect them with the Cosmic Force you are endeavouring to transmit. Take a deep breath, hold it, and then slowly exhale. While you exhale hold the thought in your mind that you are in psychic contact with your patient. You can then offer up a prayer (in your own words) asking that this person be made whole again. The nature of the illness is of no account to you, your part is to visualise them as restored to health, after prayer, and then offer thanks to the Lords of Light for their Goodness and Mercy. 
(2). By Prayer alone for "He that believeth on me, the works that I do, shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he do, because I go to my Father". (John XIV: 12) 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
