Special Communication to all Students (To accompany Grade 2. Number 43.) 
Dear Student, 

Here is a most illuminating Essay, written by one of our Students just after completing the Second Grade of our Studies. Although there are understandable gaps in his knowledge, he has correctly interpreted the hidden meaning of the most important Alchemical terms and processes, many of which are only discussed and explained in our advanced studies. We hope you will profit from his perceptive insights. 
Your Hidden Master. 
A short survey of Alchemy 
Alchemy is generally known simply as 'the secret process by which any metal can be turned into gold'. As is the case with all the great Occult Sciences and Arts, the meaning given to it by the masses fails to convey the real significance and processes which have been kept secret, for good reason. We have been offered an introduction to its nature during this Grade, for Alchemy, together with Magic- which could be seen as two sides of the same coin, two effects of the same cause- seems to be the substratum over which the Teachings of the Ancient Wisdom are built upon. It can also be seen as a process from which, by Correspondence, springs all material and Spiritual universes, as well as the cause and evolution of human personalities. This may give an inkling of the three points of view from which it can be seen, or three of the Keys with which we may unravel its secrets: the physical, the psychological, and the Spiritual. 
On the physical plane, Alchemy is indeed the key with which to turn any metal into gold, but it can also be used to manipulate other elements and to give them properties which those ordinary elements do not normally have. In the First Grade we started with discussions on the construction of the atom, as well as different processes by which elements can and actually have been transmuted, to wit, the extraction or addition of a proton from its nucleus. We were also introduced to the ether, whose properties are such as to manipulate the different states of matter, its properties of rigidity and malleability, as well as its temperature. The substance or entity with which both processes are achievable, those of transmutation and of modification of properties, is the Alkahest. 
The Alkahest has been described as the universal solvent, a fluid in nature which reduces all bodies into the original substance of which they are composed, or Ens Primum. Due to its properties, and also through the references to it in the many Lectures, we may connect it with the Universal Ether, Astral Light, Akasha, occult electricity, Anima Mundi, and Fohat-perhaps all different names, or different aspects, of the same entity. 
Now the Ens Primum. also called 'Adamic Earth', this primal element, is a liquor which will unite with water, yet retain its radical virtues, and if mixed with itself again will be converted into pure elementary water. Its properties would seem to connect it with Prima Materia, or Primordial Aether, that Primordial Substance which is eternal and coeval with Spirit, both emanations of the Supreme Deity. 
It is further stated that 'when this primordial or pre-Adamic earth is reduced to its first substance, it is in its second stage of transformation like clear water, the first stage being the Alkahest'. Therefore, both these vitally important substances for alchemical purposes, Alkahest and Ens Primum, seem in reality to be different manifestations of the same septenary Principle, the effect of the former over the latter producing the many phenomena of Alchemy. In addition, 'the subject exposed to the operations of the Alkahest is converted into three principles: salt, sulphur, and mercury,' all of which have different meanings and are very important in all Alchemical experiments. 
Another famous subject of Alchemy is the fabled Philosopher's Stone, which is said to confer great health and longevity to its holder. In Paracelsus' work on The Tincture of the Philosophers he tells us that we should mix the 'rose-coloured blood from the Lion' with the 'gluten from the Eagle', in order to create the Philosopher's Stone. Both terms are allegories used to describe sulphur and mercury. But in this case, this refers to the preparation in a mystical manner, and not in objective or material ways. So, we must mix the Lion and the Eagle. The Eagle is a common allegory to refer to the Higher Mind. The Lion is a Solar symbol, so the Sun, which may refer to the Soul. Therefore, in order to produce the Philosopher's Stone, one must mix the Soul with the Higher Mind, or, in other words, to fuse the Higher Mind into the Soul, a process which results in Illumination, Wisdom, and cessation of further compulsive reincarnations; it is the real meaning of the 'Alchemical marriage'. 
So, this description of the Philosopher's Stone as the union between Higher Mind and Soul makes sense when we consider the descriptions of the Stone made by Paracelsus, Hermes and others, that 'it is venerable, splendid in colour, a mind sublime, and an open sea'; 'it contains a Spirit of a sublime original, it is the Sea of the Wise, in which they angle for their mysterious Fish'; 'Behold, I have declared that which had been concealed, since the work is both with you and about you'. The Elixir of Life, prepared by 'making a solution of the stone in spirits of wine', 'purges the whole body of man, and cleanses it from all impurities by the introduction of new and youthful forces, which it joins to the nature of man' (all the emphases are mine). All these quotations may allude to the process of purification of the Higher Mind, which brings about Power by attunement with the Celestial, and renewed forces and energy too. Additionally, regarding this Elixir of Life, Avicenna says of this medicine that 'this Spirit is of wondrous strength, boundless power, this Spirit is named the Soul of the World, as the Soul moves all the limbs of the Body, so also is this Spirit in all elementary created things': also, 'it exists in everything, in every place, and at all times, it has the powers of all creatures, its action is found in all elements, and the qualities of all things therein, converts all metallic bodies into gold'. By this, we may theorise that the Elixir of Life is either connected to, or another name for, the Alkahest, or Astral Light. It is also said that 'it is the greatest secret of the Initiates, and those who know it and have been able to demonstrate it unto themselves, have all knowledge, all freedom, all understanding, all compassion and all Love'. So, here we have a clue that the mastery of the Alkahest or Astral Light or possibly Fohat, may be the final test in Initiation, and the final step before Adeptship. 
Regarding further considerations of the nature of Sulphur and Mercury in Alchemy, we find the next statement in the First Grade: "The symbol of the Sun in the Ship on the Ether of Space meant that the Hermetic Matter is the Principle, or basis, of Gold, or again, the philosophical Sun; the water, within which the crocodile is swimming, is that Water, or Matter made liquid; the Ship herself, finally, representing the Vessel of Nature in which the Sun, or the Sulphuric, igneous principle, acts as a pilot, because it is the Sun which conducts the work by His action upon the Moist, or Mercury'. Not only have we identified the Sulphur with the Divine Soul, being positive and male, and Mercury with the Higher Mind, being negative and female, but we see here that sulphur is also identified with the Sun (again, the Soul), the igneous principle, due to its acidic nature, and it is the Sulphur which conducts the work by its action upon the Moist, or Mercury. So, it is by the action of sulphur upon mercury that the alchemical process is effectuated in the physical plane, or Soul upon Higher Mind in the spiritual plane. The last variant is the Ship itself, representing the Vessel of Nature; this may refer to the medium in 
which the alchemical process takes place, in other words, the substance or metal to be transmuted, and also the person in which the alchemical marriage takes place. 
In order to discuss the psychological aspects of Alchemy, or that involving the characteristics of the Mind (both lower and Higher), we must first consider the concept of 'Reflection', as discussed in the first Lecture of this Second Grade. It is there said that all material phenomena are 'mirrored' from the Spiritual Regions, so Man does not perceive Actuality, but Reality. These reflections are thrown upon the mirrors of the veils of illusion in a reversed manner, like in an ordinary mirror, but the mind corrects them by reversing them; so, all things in the material plane are actually how they are seen in a mirror, and the reflections in a mirror are in fact as real as the mirror itself, and as everything else in the planes of illusion. 
Now, the more evolved the Higher Mind is, the finer and more rapid its vibrations are, and the opposite also applies. Therefore, by a process of attunement, the Higher Mind is attracted to the vibrations which are more akin to itself, and which are produced by certain elements of their surroundings; some elements having a higher rate of vibration, which are themselves a reflection of the conditions in the Higher Realms, just as other elements produce lower vibrations, and are a reflection of the lower realms. This explains why lesser evolved higher minds are attracted to things which are innately 'bad', that is, that produce low and slower vibrations, while the higher evolved person is attracted to 'good' things, that is, things which have higher and faster vibrations. Furthermore, the outer personality, our character, is the vehicle through which our Higher Mind experiences the world and gains experience. No two persons live life the same way, and each has to learn different lessons. So it follows that, depending on the type of lesson that the Higher Mind must learn, its personality will be specially prepared for and ready to learn that lesson. Therefore, our character and personality change depending on the grade of purity of our Higher Mind, and it will be finer or coarser depending on the lessons which we will still have to learn. This whole process of purification can also be viewed as the acquiring of our own Philosopher's Stone, of the transmutation of our character, and represents the psychological side of Alchemy. 
Here ends this essay on the different meanings and interpretations of Alchemy. Although we may wonder at the many possibilities and applications of physical and material Alchemy, it is in its psychological and Spiritual aspects that we should be most 
interested—both of which are in fact two sides of the same coin, just as the Higher Mind is the lesser of its better half, the Soul. For it behoves us, as Students of Occult Science, to transmute our personality for our own advancement and for the betterment of all mankind-from the base and rusted iron of our lower mind, through the Silver Higher Mind, to the Pure Gold of the Soul. 
The rudimentary and material flour, a germ reflecting the splendour to be, yet in a dormant state, is mixed with the waters of understanding, the salt of purification, and the yeast of wisdom; a dough which is too rigid to stretch properly at first, the Self is knitted and shaped and moulded by loving and guiding hands. It is stretched over itself, and each fold, each incarnation, serves to strengthen and develop the dough so that slowly it may gain the flexibility and poise to maintain its structure and unity and not crumble when once baked in the oven of Judgement. That base flour is transmuted in the Fires of Initiation into Holy Bread, which shall feed and sustain those who are in need of nourishment, just like the Self reborn will be a beacon of Light to guide the way for those who dwell in Darkness. 
J. G. B 
Now see if you cannot emulate this Student's excellent work by hunting up any subject that appeals to you in the lectures and submitting your insights about it to us. 
H.M. 
