SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 49. 
1 
Dear Disciple, 
One of the reasons why the horns of the supposed unicorns fetched such high prices was that it was believed that they had valuable medicinal properties and were an antidote for poisons. Whether the actual animal ever existed is still in doubt; at any rate, there is no evidence to the contrary. The Hebrew word, 'Reem', which appears so often in the Bible, has been translated 'Unicorn', and W. Smith considers that the passage in Deuteronomy 33:17, should be rendered "his horns are like the horns of a unicorn", and he is of the opinion that some species of wild ox is intended, Herodotus refers to it as the 'horned ass'. Aristotle mentions two kinds and Caesar tells of its existence within the bounds of the great Hercynian Forest. Leo speaks of the Ethiopian unicorn, of ash colour, resembling a two-year old colt with the head of a goat with a white horn with yellow streaks. Ludolphus states: "Here is also another beast (in Ethiopia), called arucharis, with one horn, fierce and strong, of which unicorn several have been seen feeding in the woods". And so there are many writers of the latter parts of 'Antiquity' who mention it. The unicorn is known in Tibet as the serou, in Mongolia as the kere, and one Tibetan manuscript terms it the one-horned Tso Po. 
The unicorn was the symbol for the Great Lama of Tibet, and in the life of Chengiz Khan there is the story of the unicorn falling on its knees thrice for that monarch, as if to pay respect to him. The Grand Lama in the form of the unicorn, knowing the Apocalypse, is said to have recognised in Chengiz Khan the anointed Manu of God. Sarou, the name given here to the unicorn, is the Saros, or cycle of six thousand years which have elapsed from the appearance of the First Messiah until the era of the eleventh, and Chengiz Khan was considered to be that Eleventh Messiah in the Tibetan doctrine. With the Eagle, Bull and Lion, the Unicorn is also one of the emblems of the Sun. 
Trees have been worshipped and used as symbols from the earliest known times until today. For the origin of the mysterious reverence with which certain trees and flowers were anciently regarded, and of 'tree worship', properly so-called, we must go back to that primeval period into which comparative mythology has afforded us such remarkable glimpses; when the earth to its early inhabitants seemed ‘apparelled in celestial light', and when every part of creation seemed to be endowed with a strange and conscious vitality: a vitality that is still present today in lonely places, such as in the depths of a great forest, amidst the mountains, far away from all human habitation, or on a lonely coast, such as can be found even in England along certain parts of the coast of West Cornwall, or along the coasts of Scotland. 
Paradise itself, says Evelyn, was but a kind of "nemorous temple or sacred grove", planted by God Himself, and given to man; and he goes on to suggest that the groves which the patriarchs are recorded to have planted in different parts of Palestine, may have been memorials of that first tree-shaded paradise from which Adam was expelled. 
The 'Trees of Life' and of 'Knowledge' are at once suggested by the mysterious sacred tree which appears in the most ancient scriptures and paintings of Egypt and Assyria, and in those of the remote East. In the symbolism of these nations the sacred tree sometimes figures as a type of the universe, and represents the whole system of created things, but more frequently as a tree of life, by whose fruits the votaries of the gods are nourished with divine strength (please remember the 'Soma' tree here, of which we told you in the 'Moon' lectures of Grade 1), and prepared one for the joys of immortality. The most ancient types of this mystical tree of life are the date, the fig, and the pine or cedar. Of these, the earliest of which any representation occurs is the palm (Phoenix Dactylifera) — the true date palm of the valley of the Nile and of the great alluvial plane of ancient Babylonia — a tree which is exceeded in size and dignity by many of its congeners, but which is spread over two, at least, of the great ancient centres of civilisation, and which, besides its great importance as a food producer has a special beauty of its own when the clusters of dates are hanging in golden ripeness under its coronal of dark green leaves. It is figured as a tree of life on an Egyptian sepulchral tablet certainly older than the 15th. Century B.C., and preserved in the Museum at Berlin (*see note at end). Two arms issue from the top of the tree, one of which presents a tray of dates to the deceased, who stands in front of it, whilst the other gives him water, 'the water of life'. The arms are those of the goddess Nut, and the Paradise here intended is the state or place of departed righteous souls, who have triumphed over evil through the power of Osiris, whose names they now bear, and those souls are now placed for ever in this heavenly kingdom. Now do you recognise in this the Higher Mind in the Fourth Realm? 
Thousands of years before even the age imputed to Genesis, there were sculptured on the Zodiac of Dendera in Egypt, two sacred trees, the Western and Eastern. The first was Truth and Religion the sacred palm surmounted by the ostrich feather of Truth (Maat) the latter: the vital or generative force of nature, beyond which Egypt thought she had risen, therein surpassing her Eastern parent. 
All Eastern literature teems with the stories told of the sacred fig tree, Ficus Religiosa. Under its holy shade, gods, goddesses, men and animals disport themselves, and talk with each other on sacred and profane themes. From it, as from many another holy tree, ascended gods and holy men to heaven, and it and many others are yet to be the cradles of coming Avatars. Under this sacred tree did the pious Sākymooni become a Boodh, or enlightened one — a Buddha, and it is from the rubbing together of the wood of trees, notably of the three Banyan trees Peepal, Bār and Gooler, that holy fire is drawn from heaven. 
Trees have frequently been identified with gods: thus in the Panma Purāna, the religious fig tree is an incarnation of Vishnu, the Indian fig tree (Ficus Indica) of Rudra, and the Palāsa of Brahmā. 
In the Varāka Purāna, the planter of a group of trees of a particular species is promised heavenly bliss, and it is needless to point out from the names of the trees recommended, that the extensive utility of the act must be acknowledged. Thus it is said: "He never goes to hell who plants an asvatha, or a pichumarda, or a banyan or ten jessamines, or two pomegranates, a panchamra or five mangoes". There are different lists too, and should anyone not have the necessary room to plant all those trees, the custom is to plant them in small pots where they are dwarfed into small shrubs. No tree with fruit or blossom may be cut down as the cutter is threatened with the destruction of his family and wealth. 
The religious fig tree makes one rich, the Jonesia Asoka destroys all sorrow, the Ficus Venosa is useful in sacrifices, and the Neem tree gives much happiness. The pomegranate brings a good wife, the Buta gives the protection of Brahma, the Bel tree pleases Shiva, and the Patală the goddess Parvati. The Apsarases (or Heavenly Maidens) are delighted with the Bombax Malabaricum or red kapok tree, and the Gandharvas with the Jasmin..... while the Sunflower is supposed to emit gases that destroy miasma: and so on. 
One of the most famous fig trees in Hindustan is the Cubeer Burr; its extent is prodigious and it is of great beauty. It is said to be over 3000 years old, and 7000 persons can easily shelter under it. It is filled with singing birds of many varieties and loaded with small figs of a rich scarlet colour. Many of such trees cover each a circumference of five acres and there are several under which an army of 10,000 men can find shelter. 
Oracular trees of the Sun and Moon appear in all the fabulous histories of Alexander the Great, from the pseudo-Callisthenis downwards. Thus Alexander is made to tell the story..... "Then came some of the townspeople and said: 'We have to show thee something passing strange, O King, and worth thy visiting; for we can show thee trees that talk with human speech'. So they led me to a certain park, in the midst of which were the Sun and Moon. And there stood the two trees of which they had spoken, like unto cypress trees; and round about them were trees like the myrobolans of Egypt, and with similar fruit. And I addressed the two trees that were in the midst of the park, the one which was male in the masculine gender, and the one that was female in the feminine gender. And the name of the male tree was the Sun, and of the female tree the Moon, names which were in that language Muthu and Emaüsae. And the stems were clothed with the skins of animals; the male tree with the skins of he-beasts, and the female tree with the skins of she-beasts..... And at the setting of the Sun a Voice, speaking in the Indian tongue, came forth from the (Sun) tree; and I ordered the Indians who were with me to interpret it. But they were afraid and would not". No wonder the Indians "were afraid and would not", for very likely the Voice told Alexander of his early death, and the phenomenon was of a similar nature to that of the Oracle of Delphi. 
Maundeville informs us precisely where the trees are "A fifteen journeys in lengthe, goyinge be the deserts of the tother side of the Ryvere Neumare", if one could only tell where that is!! 
T A medieval chronicler also tells us that Ogerus, the Dane, conquered all the parts beyond the sea from Hierusalem to the Trees of the Sun. In the old Italian romance too of 'Guerino detto il Meschine', still a chapbook in Southern Italy, the hero visits the Trees of the Sun and Moon. It will be observed that the story ascribed to Alexander describes the two oracular trees as resembling two cypress trees. As such the trees of the Sun and Moon are represented on several extant ancient medals, e.g., on two struck at Perga, in Pamphylia, in the time of the Emperor Aurelian (270-275 A.D). An Eastern story tells us of two vast cypress trees, sacred among the Magians, which grew in Khorasan, one at Kashmar near Turshiz, and the other at Farmad near Tuz, and which were said to have risen from shoots that Zoroaster brought from Paradise. The former of these was sacrilegiously cut down by the order of the Caliph Motawakkil, in the ninth century. The trunk was despatched to Baghdad on rollers at vast expense, whilst the branches alone formed a load for 1,300 camels. The night that the convoy reached within one stage of the palace, the Caliph was cut in pieces by his own guards. This tree was said to be 1,450 years old, and to measure 334 cubits in girth. The locality of this "Arbel Sol" we see was in Khorasan, and possibly its fame may have been transferred to a representative of another species. The plane as well as the cypress was one of the distinctive trees of the Magian Paradise. 
To speak at length of the palm tree would require a large volume. So much does man owe to this tree in the East, that the inhabitants of those countries can conceive of no land possessing any attraction where it does not exist. A conventional form of the palm tree occurs on the Nineveh tablets, surrounded by an enclosure of palmettas, and attended by winged deities, or ministers holding the pine-cone symbol of life, which in Assyrian sculpture takes the place of the crux ansata in the hands of the Egyptian gods. The palmetta passed from the Assyrians to the Greeks, and formed the crowning ornament of their most beautiful temples. It appears also to have been a symbol among the Etruscans, and, together with the palm tree, will be found on Etruscan sacred utensils. 
A very remarkable tree found in Tibet was described by the Abbé Huc in his travels in that and other countries in the years 1844/46; it was called the "Tree of Ten Thousand Images", and his account of it is as follows: "The mountain at the foot of which Tsong-Kaba was born, became a famous place of pilgrimage. Lamas assembled there from all parts to build their cells, and thus by degrees was formed that flourishing Lamasery, the fame of which extends to the remotest parts of Tartary. It is called Kounboum, from two Tibetan words signifying Ten Thousand Images, and having allusion to the tree which, according to the legend, sprang from Tsong-Kaba's hair, and bears a Tibetan character on each of its leaves. 
On each leaf appears a well-formed Tibetan character, and all are of a green colour, some darker, some lighter than the leaf itself. When you remove a piece of old bark, the young bark under it exhibits the distinct outline of characters in a germinatory state, and what is very singular, these new characters are not infrequently different from those which they replace. There is only one such tree known, and in summer it produces large red flowers of an extremely beautiful shape. Various attempts have been made in different Lamaseries of Tartary and Tibet to propagate it by seeds and cuttings, but all these attempts have been fruitless". 
As there is now only one more lecture to follow in this grade, we are reluctantly compelled to leave the subject of "Symbols" for a while, 
for there is yet another item of great interest to be included according to the schedule outlined in our Manifesto. And that is the great subject of "The inhabitants of the Astral Worlds". Our next lecture will therefore be the first of an important series of talks on this, but we will continue these symbolical discussions in Grade 3 as well. In the meanwhile we trust that you have found the lectures on Symbols of interest. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
Note: One of our advanced students has pointed out to us that in the Latin name for the true date palm, Phoenix dactylifera, we may find concealed a number of important Principles and Laws. In Poetry, Dactyl refers to a metrical foot consisting of one long syllable followed by two short; not such a bad description for our three Principles of Soul, Higher Mind and lower mind. In Greek Mythology, the Dactyls were a mythic group of workers in metal and healing magicians who were closely associated with the Great Mother. 'Dactylifera' also contains the words 'Life' and 'Ra', the Egyptian Sun-God, whilst the grand symbol of the 'Phoenix' arising from the ashes of the material needs no further elucidation we hope. Coincidence? We rather doubt it! And whilst we would not wish to encourage our good students to go too far in analysing words such as this, it does show that there can be more in them than meets the eye! 
