SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 40. 

Dear Disciple, 

In A.I. Oparin's book, 'The Origin of Life' (Oliver and Boyd, 3rd Ed. 1957 which is still considered by some to be the 'authoritative' book on this subject), the author rejects all the 'futile attempts' of the post-Pasteurian period to prove that life should be 'eternal'; in other words, that it is possible to transfer it from one planet to another in the sense of the panspermic theory of S. Arrhenius (1859-1927). The latter was not the originator of this theory, however, for Lord Kelvin postulated the 'eternity' of life as long ago as 1871. Others, like Preyer, Richter, and so on, assumed that there was an 'eternal' principle which was passed on from organism to organism and — if necessary from Planet to Planet, or from Star to Planet, or from one Solar System to another. We should not say that this is entirely impossible, for we must remember that meteorites etc., do fall upon our Earth, and if on our Earth, why not other bodies in Space, and that some of these have been found to contain carbon, water, organic compounds and amino acids! In 1996 a group of scientists led by David McKay of NASA's Johnson Space Center claimed to have discovered evidence of primitive bacterial life in a meteorite discovered in Antarctica and believed to be from Mars (Science, August 1996). It is possible that one (or more) of such 'heavenly Messengers' has brought life to Earth in the form of crystallised organisms which were dissolved in the warm and moist atmosphere or substance of our Globe when it was very young. But this is not necessarily so, for we have already indicated to you that there are 'hosts' of Creators of all grades; beings, the nature of which is a great and deep mystery to material Science, and will remain so for ever and for ever. How these Beings and Forces work is the subject of later Studies in our Order. 
Oparin based his opinion on the temperature of interstellar Space, which is thought to be, (by Science) approaching absolute Zero (-270°C), and with its ultra violet radiation of unchecked violence. He emphasises that this radiation alone could destroy any living organism or germ. However, during the last few decades Science has discovered a new class of microorganisms it calls 'extremophiles' which are able to live and thrive in extreme environments such as high or low temperatures and pH levels, high salt concentrations, and high pressure, etc. One of these remarkable organisms a small, pond-dwelling creature called a tardigrade was recently sent into Space and survived! In 2008 the European Space Agency (ESA) sent over 600 examples of extremophiles to the International Space Station. For 18 months, two thirds of the samples were exposed to the vacuum of Space and extreme radiation while the rest enjoyed the 'luxury' of a thin carbon dioxide atmosphere that simulated the Martian environment. When the samples were returned to Earth it was found that not only the tardigrade but also a humble lichen Xanthoria elegans had survived the harsh environment of Space by simply 'switching off" and waiting for conditions to improve (Current Biology, September 2008). Moreover, Oparin forgets that such germs may be embedded in huge lumps of matter which would be shattered when coming into contact with the Earth's atmosphere or surface, thus causing a 'rain of life' to descend upon our Globe. The fact remains that the real properties of interstellar Space are only now beginning to be examined by Science, and still remain largely unknown. 
When it is stated that there are shorter and more powerful interstellar radiations than ultra violet such as gamma and cosmic rays which bring about chemical changes in meteorites, decompose atoms, and violently attack all particles of matter, so that new elements are formed; iron being changed (or transmuted) into aluminium or magnesium, and so on, we must not lose sight of the fact that huge meteorites have fallen on the Earth's surface, almost intact, and are on view in museums all over the world. There is plenty of room in such pieces for untold billions of still living organisms as Science is now beginning to discover. But this is all by the way. Oparin, however, talks the same jargon as the rest of his fraternity. They say that life is the result of a long process of the evolution of matter; and as we know that this is incorrect we can write him off, like all the rest. We might add that his book was also called an 'epoch-making' work!! With regard to the 'life' that is forwarded from one Solar System to another, whether this takes the form of the extremophiles we have mentioned, or some other form, we might as well ask: 'Where did it commence originally?' 
It is difficult to keep pace with the unending flow of scientific data these days, but as far as we are aware, we are left in the midst of similar arguments to those which occurred between the Beutner and Oparin schools of thought; for the first named said that 'enzymes' first appeared through the action of electric discharges, without any structure around them as self-regenerating enzymes, around whom, or which, a structure was built up later on; and the latter's hypothesis was that structural units with a remote 'resemblance' to living organisms were first formed from the organic matter of the 'early ocean', and that later on 'enzymes' formed in them, so as to enable them to assimilate substances from their environment. In this manner some of the 'coacervates' - as Oparin called them eventually developed into living organisms. However at the time when they commenced their arguments, neither Beutner nor Oparin were aware that enzymes range in molecular weight from about 10,000 up into the millions (!) and are therefore incredibly complex structures. But the 'modern' schools of thought still utilise much of the theoretical groundwork laid down by these two scientists. Nowadays the terminology is greatly changed and the processes outlined become ever more complex — but the problem remains unresolved. 
Science knows that the so-called 'living molecule' is a fact; but this cannot be regarded as the simplest form of life, for a molecule, being a combination of two or more atoms, and each atom being a highly elaborate structure, as you will remember from the discussions in Grade 1, such 'living molecules' are therefore very complex beings indeed, notwithstanding the fact that they are invisible to man unless he be armed with the most modern electron microscopes. But it must be visible to the force or being which or who 'created' it.... for it had to build up this highly complex creature by adding, combining and recombining and constructing each different sort of living molecule until the 'DNA sequences' (as they are now called) were correctly arranged and the purpose achieved and the living structure was complete. If it should be said that it is not necessary for these 'Forces' to see, the reply is that a structure cannot be constructed without something or someone having some sort of 'perception' of the work in hand. These things do not just 'happen'. There must be some means whereby the creating, building or assembling force or entity is aware of what is happening; just as a blind person learns to see by means of touch, or hearing. Whether one sense is used or another matters not, for the moment, even if the assembling is due only to attraction. If one thing or being attracts another there must be at work something, call it magnetism or affinity if you wish, that answers to the attraction; or the repulsion. If this is so there must be a sensation of some sort; and we cannot have a sensation without senses, or affinity, or at least one sense. This opens up a very wide field of possibilities, as you will see. 
Now what is sensation, attraction, repulsion, affinity and so on? Does a 'dead' body have any sensation? Not so far as the previously inhabiting principle that gave it life is concerned; a principle that has left that 'dead' body; and as it has left it, it must now be elsewhere! We know that that principle was and is the Living Spirit, which used that once living body, because the Spirit gave it Life, and as Life has always awareness of some sort, it 'animated' every nerve, fibre, organ, etc., of that once living body, using for the purpose its living senses. Without Life there can be no sensation, even if that sensation should be latent to a smaller or greater extent at times of shorter or longer 
duration. Without sensation no Life; even if that life should also be largely dormant.... as far as we know! Therefore: Life and sensation, whatever form it takes, or whichever manner it manifests, is the inhabiting, or activating principle, that causes matter to exist in a live manner when that principle is present, and that causes once 'living' matter to appear and be inert and 'dead' when it has left it and is absent. 
Some Scientists have different views though! 
Oparin assumed that the first forms of life to appear were much larger than 'living molecules'. Why he thought so we do not presume to understand; but this sort of reasoning resembles the building of a house, the builder first 'creating' a whole story in one fell swoop, without using such small and necessary details as bricks, mortar, planks, cement, steel, glass and other ingredients generally used for this purpose. No! He just produces the complete story, or even the whole building, like the conjurer produces a rabbit from an empty hat. 

Oparin worked out the following hypothesis concerning the formation of these 'first and larger' forms of life, which can be briefly summarised in the following manner. In the early, and lifeless, ocean, the various organic substances were present there in the form of 'Colloidal solutions', just as protein solution in water in which the mole- cular aggregates, or 'micellae' are evenly distributed. He then reasons that by an interaction of different colloids, there came into being a segregation of liquid jelly-like masses, which tended to concentrate the organic matter in certain points. Then these small points or droplets of matter which he called 'coazervates', gradually evolved into living organisms. This seems to us like putting the cart before the horse. Or it may be compared to the engaged couple getting their home together and occupying same after the honeymoon, ready for immediate occupation, with all modern conveniences, etc., 'a most desirable residence', as the estate agents would call it! Each separate coacervate has not only an individual structure of its own - assumed Oparin - but it is also cap- able of resorbing matter (grocer, baker, milkman and butcher delivering the provisions to the newlyweds); hence it grows and multiplies in the end by cell-division. Yes.... that is all very well; but Oparin completely forgot to supply the bride and bridegroom; for he did not say how or why life enters the ready-made premises. All he has supplied is the imaginary empty house, which, by some entirely unknown and mysterious miracle will come to life all by itself by means of some unexplained chemical processes; and it has not even life projected into it from somewhere; no- it just 'happens'. Not good enough! 

In the book mentioned in the previous Lecture Dr. Beutner said: "Differences of opinion are bound to occur when such obscure problems as the origin of life are under discussion." Granted.... if you do not know what you are talking about. But why should such differences of opinion occur when you do know? One either knows, or does not; and Science certainly does not know! A group of leading scientists meeting at Lake Como early in 1970 never finalised their debate: “Do we, or don't we, understand the secret of life and its origins at least in general outline?" While in 1972 those two well-known biologists Tortora and Becker, whom we mentioned before, stated that: "Any account of the origin of life is highly speculative and subject to continual and often drastic revision. At present, there is no crucial test to ascertain the accuracy.... of any proposed account of the origin of life". Please bear in mind the fact that these two learned researchers were fully aware of the countless extravagant claims made for DNA by some of the most renowned biologists in the world. More recently, one Scientist wrote: "the mystery of life remains as deep as ever" (Musings on the Origin of Life and Panspermia. Milton Wainwright Ph.D., Journal of Cosmology, January 2010). Now that at least is an honest statement from a Scientist we can agree with! 
It will be seen therefore that Science still assumes, presumes, speculates, theorises; it has 'differences of opinion'; but it has no working hypothesis, and it does not know the secret Laws of the Universe, for it denies the guiding, directing and utterly Wise and Divine Creators; it denies the animating Spirit - which only is Life, and not dead and inert matter, which can be animated only by the Life of the Spirit, and the Divine Spark, or Life-Principle - which Science also denies. 
Thus all the wished and longed for combinations of divergent views, all the collations of different hypotheses, no matter on what 'rational basis' they are founded by various scientists, will not lead Science to the true secret of Life, as it is hoped will be the case. 
When Science talks of 'about 3.7 billion years of life on record', it is still vague, and such rough statements cannot be compared with the definite Cycles known to Occult Science. In the beginning of the present Manvantara, as well as in all beginnings of the preceding ones and those to follow on our Globe, life depended on all the salts contained in the ocean, without exception. Analysis of blood shows that in it are contained all the salts in the ocean, although the relative amount of the several salts is not exactly the same; but there is a preponderance of sodium chloride in both. Moreover, the total salt 
content of the blood is only about 0.9%; whereas in the ocean it is 3.5%. It is thought that our blood is of a similar salt constituency as that of the ancient ocean of hundreds of millions of years ago, when the first animals left the sea and adapted themselves to life on the land. Science therefore presumes that the blood of the higher animals was originally developed from the water of the ocean. (The real properties of the blood, however, will be revealed to you later on, esoterically). 
As it is presumed that the surface of the Earth, and hence the Ocean, was probably warmer in the early periods than it is today, the warm blood of the body may be looked upon as another inheritance which has been kept at an even level, "reminding us of the oceanic existence of our remote aquatic forbears," as Dr. Beutner says. 
Although Darwin, Haeckel and Company have been largely discarded nowadays by Science, it is still under the hypnotic influence of these truly great men, wrong as their conclusions were in many ways. Occult Science, on the other hand, does not speculate or theorise; it knows the true Laws and Principles, and tells its students of these mighty and sublime verities. 
Science has discovered that the movements of an Amoeba, the small living speck of matter, glass-like in its transparency, that can be found in almost any ditch or pond, and a tiny drop of oil are very similar. The Amoeba, with its 'pseudopodia', that look like limbs, wraps these limbs around any particle of suitable food; while a drop of ordinary oil will develop similar 'pseudopodia' and stretch them around a small spot of alcohol, if such a substance is added to lower surface tension. 
In these two examples it sees a resemblance to life in the case of the drop of oil.... which is therefore due to 'Chemical action' in both cases!! But we should like to see the drop of oil that propels itself in the water in the way an amoeba does, when it goes forth on its mysterious errands, under the influence of its will, or instinct. We think that such comparisons are rather childish, and serve no other purpose than to show that Science does not know where to turn in order to 'prove' its inadmissible material theories. 
Whereas from drops of oil from the brain of a healthy animal there radiate a number of tiny fibres, like rays around the Sun, one Scientist (Dr. Telkes, who worked in Crile's research laboratory in the Cleveland Clinic) obtained different results from the brain of a rabbit which had died from extreme exhaustion, occurring after the poor animal had been kept awake for four days. The drops of oil from the brain of this animal martyr, mercilessly destroyed in the most cruel and heartless manner imaginable, did no longer exhibit these rays. The only satisfaction Science derived from this inhuman experiment was that, through nervous exhaustion the very substance of the brain is changed. Another material success, leading nowhere in particular. But if we look a little closer at the ghastly picture presented to us by Science in these 'enlightened' days, we shall, knowing the Laws, come to the conclusion that, whereas in the case of an animal, or human being dying a natural or sudden death, the 'life-principle' is still present to a small extent (see Grade 1, Lecture 22) if the 'drop of oil' is taken immediately after 'death', in the above quoted case the animal's life-principle had already begun to leave the tortured body after the second day of its ordeal, and that the last remnant departed with its final breath; therefore the drop of oil could not send out any fibres in the shape of a corona of rays, or in any other way; thus confirming our teachings once more, and showing that Science is incompetent to deal with such secrets so long as it adheres to its material concepts only and denies the spiritual forces. 
In the Inner Circle Teachings we shall take up this subject again, but in the meantime we hope that we have given you an interesting introduction to it. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
