SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. 
Grade 2. Number 46. 
Dear Disciple, 
We must now consider 'Symbols', and try to discover just what they really are, and how we may employ them. But before we do this we want to give you a little experiment that may prove very useful to you in future. There are times when one feels so tired and exhausted that life itself seems to be a burden. In such cases we generally see a doctor and ask him to give us something; or we go to the chemist and buy some preparation or another, often containing harmful ingredients of a chemical nature, and in this and other ways we try to spur our physical system into some sort of renewed activity, whereas in reality we should take a rest, and give nature a chance to do the necessary repairs and renewals within. We may have certain duties to fulfil, or work to do, which makes it very difficult to go away for a rest, and thus we continue to flog the patient animal body and drive it onwards in spite of its warnings and pleadings for a temporary halt. Now, is there not some simple thing we can do in order to assist the body to recover its usual strength and vitality? Something which makes it unnecessary to swallow lots of pills and potions which do not help us much in reality? Yes, there is; and we will tell you here what you may do in order to restore your strength without any drugs or chemicals. 
We have hinted before that a certain amount of vitality escapes continually from the extremities of the body, i.e., from the hands and feet. It flows out from the thumbs, and from the index - and middle fingers especially, and also from the toes. We have told you before how you can stop this outflow of vital force: namely, by placing your feet together, and at the same time the tips of the fingers of both hands. Or you may cross your ankles when sitting down which is even better, and place together the tips of the thumb, index and middle fingers of each hand separately; just as if you were in the act of taking a pinch of salt. This you may do in cases when you do not want to be 'obvious' by placing together all the fingertips of both hands when you are in the presence of a person who unconsciously saps all your vitality; and that such persons exist we all know from our own experience. 
But there is a better way in which you can actually capture that outflowing vitality and put it back again within yourself! You should take a glass half full of water, thin glass preferred (the thinner the better), and hold it in both hands in such a way that the tips of the thumbs of both hands, and also the tips of the index and middle fingers press slightly against the outside of the glass, or tumbler. Press firmly, but not so firmly that you break the glass! Hold it thus for half-a- minute or so, and then take a deep breath, hold it as long as you can, 
and concentrate on the tips of the thumbs and fingers that are against the outside of the tumbler. After you can hold your breath no longer, exhale very slowly and keep on concentrating on the fingertips. Wait one minute, always holding the glass and concentrating on the fingertips, and repeat the deep breath, etc.; wait again as before and repeat the whole process once more. When you have done it three times, the water will be highly magnetised, and you should drink it slowly without waiting any longer. There is a principle present in all fresh and living water, inherent in its atoms, which are full of life in any case. But by thus magnetising it, you add to it another living and vital principle from within yourself, and this reinforces the water atoms to such an extent that when you drink the water you actually take within yourself something which is a hundred times as potent as the vitality that entered the water through the glass from your fingertips. What you have actually done while concentrating is to draw some of the great Life-Principle of the Universe, which is a form of electricity not known to Science, into yourself, and from yourself it flows into the water there being a highly Occult Law involved in the process which we shall explain in the Inner Teachings of The Order. And this electricity awakens the water atoms to fuller life, as it were, so that when you drink it you imbibe new Life-Force which will help you to overcome your tiredness. A similar principle is used in a different manner when a priest prepares 'holy water', provided he is utterly sincere and knows how to concentrate and direct the Life-Principle of the Universe into the water he 'blesses'. Both Processes come under the heading of 'Natural Magic'. 

Some Occult Orders we know give slightly similar instructions for magnetising water, but we know of none that has ever explained to its students what really happens. Perhaps it is one of these 'awful and great secrets'; perhaps they do not know. Nor is the process they teach exactly the same as ours, and neither is the result so efficacious as our own method. You may also give such water to your own family circle, or to very private friends. We have known, and do know of very many of our Students who have given magnetised water to their near and dear ones when they were ill with very beneficial results. But you should not tell them just what you are doing, nor give it to strangers. At times the water may taste slightly salty; or it may sparkle and bubble if your magnetic force plus your concentration is very powerful. But it can never harm anyone; this you will realise. When you hold the glass in your hands, please see that it does not touch a table or anything else, for in that case you make an 'earth', and the power simply flows through the water and into the ground, leaving no added vitality behind. This is very important!! 
And now we must talk about Symbols. What are all these magical, mysterious and Occult lines, figures, cubes, squares, triangles and so on, that we often see in works on Occultism, Mysticism, Magic and kindred subjects? To the uninitiated they are as meaningless as the writings of the Alchemists. To them a square is a square, a circle a circle, a triangle a triangle; but when these symbols are interwoven and combined in thousands of different ways they mean nothing at all to such people; except, perhaps, a lot of hocus pocus, nonsense and balderdash. Very often they are right, for there are not a great many persons who really know what such things stand for..... even when it is only a question of simple squares, triangles and circles! In the hands of an Adept, the manipulation of the simplest symbols can result in genuine magic of the Highest and also of the lowest sort. An Adept will also be able very often though not always to read and interpret correctly what such symbols mean; even when they have been constructed by groups or persons with whom he has no connection whatever. But it is possible to disguise the meaning of symbols so completely that no one but the Initiate who has constructed them for his own purposes will be able to know what is really represented by them. 
— 
To commence with the simplest ones, such as the square, triangle and circle, the general meaning is that the square may stand for 'a firm basis', 'solidity', the Material, and so on; or it may represent the Four lower Realms of the Seven Divine Cosmic Planes; or the four lower principles of Septenary Man; the four elements, the four cardinal points, etc., etc. The Circle stands for Eternity; having neither beginning nor end; or it may represent the rotary or circling movement of 'Spirit'. Neither of these two symbols can be inverted or reversed (though the square may be tilted), as so many other symbols can; thus using them for Black Magic. 
The Triangle with the point at the apex or top may mean the three higher principles of man, or the three highest realms of Spirit, where all connection with the material planes has been severed; that is, with the material as it is known on Earth, or on the three planes above Earth, varying on each plane or in each Realm!! There are many other meanings to the Triangle so placed. But here we have the possibility of placing it in all sorts of positions; even with the point downwards. Now there are Orders in which the Triangle with the point downwards is used as a symbol of the influence of 'Spirit' flowing down from the Spiritual Realms to the Material; especially to the Earth Plane. This is all very well; the intention is good; but there is a great danger attached to the use of the Triangle in this manner, for it might be interpreted as a symbol of the Black Arts, the reason being that black magicians invert or reverse sacred symbols such as the reversed Swastika, turning anticlockwise, the Black Mass - which is the Divine White Mass reversed, or the inverted Pentagram. 
Now we ask all our students not to interpret the above statement in the sense that we assume that all persons or Orders who reverse sacred symbols are black magicians. Far from it. Many people sin thus in ignorance and with the very best intentions; and therefore there is no sin! For it is always and ever the intention or thought that counts. There is also an added danger here, and that is that a good many students of Occultism and Mysticism are all too ready to call 'black' all those who do not do as they do!! This is very wrong indeed and must be avoided at all cost. But as we, your teachers, are supposed to tell you a little about symbols at this stage of our studies, we must tell you all the possibilities of the application of them, and also warn you against their wrong application or use. It is the same with the five-pointed Star, In one way it is used as a protection against elemental forces or entities, but it can be used for the evocation of them too, and the ignorant use of it may lead to trouble. The writer of this lecture once knew a 'Master' of an Occult Group who constantly made this sign of the five-pointed star (secretly as he thought) whenever he heard anyone talk about Occult Matters he did not understand in the least. But the amusing part of it all was that he used it in a certain manner that is used for the evocation of the dark forces of which he was so afraid, so that each time he did this he had to be protected without knowing it against the possible results of his ignorance by those who did know the correct way! And such persons go about teaching Occultism to those who are still more ignorant than themselves!! 
The Cross, in its many shapes and meanings, can be used also for good and evil purposes, and, as we said before, this applies to almost any symbol. 
When a dot is placed in the centre of a circle it is generally intended to represent the Supreme Deity in the midst of His Universe. It can also mean the Sun in the Solar System, the Divine Principle in man, the nucleus in the Atom, and so on. It has the same meaning when it is found in the two interlaced triangles, the so-called 'Solomon's Seal'...which it never was! 
― 
To protect a room, or a house, or any other place, from hostile and evil influences the following is often done and, if done properly, it works. Take a glass of magnetised water, prepared in the way we told you at the beginning of this lecture, and draw a triangle with it using 
the index finger of your right hand in front of every opening of the house or place; doors, windows, chimneys and so forth. The apex of the triangle should point to the opening from the inside of the house in the horizontal plane. Of course, you draw the triangle on the floor, windowsill, hearth, etc., whichever horizontal surface is in front of the opening, not in the air! You carry the glass of water with you in your left hand as you proceed, dipping your right index finger in the water as often as necessary to keep it wet. Only after you have completed the exercise to your satisfaction should you put down the glass, for as we said earlier, as soon as you do so, the power flows to ground and is lost. You may also use the five-pointed star for the same purpose; and this is even more powerful. This should act as a very potent form of protection if you think such is needed; but it all depends on the strength of your magnetism (which you can increase by taking several deep breaths, holding them as long as possible, and exhaling slowly) and upon the force of your WILL. Should a person use any symbol for evil purposes (and if you have read the above carefully you will have seen the possibilities and the ways in which this can be done), then the chances are that he who does so will draw to himself the attention of evil forces and beings as well, and thus reap his just reward. For each symbol, used with evil intent, can become a two-edged weapon that may turn on the user instead of destroying or harming his or her intended victim. In such cases a little knowledge is distinctly a very dangerous thing. 
Thus far we have mentioned only a few geometrical figures. But there are great numbers of other symbols, too, such as totems, trees, horses, serpents, birds, fishes, insects, flowers and plants, and a host of other things to which we shall refer partly in our next lecture and in further detail later on. In case you would like to try out the five-pointed star we give you here the correct and protective form of it. Its proper name is the 'Pentacle', and the universal Pentacle must be pictured with its point soaring upwards, the sign of White Magic — while in the human Pentacle it is the lower limbs that are upwards, forming the 'Horns of Satan', as the Christian Kabalists call this figure in that position. This latter is the symbol of Matter, that of the personal man, and the recognised Pentacle of the Black Magician. It represents physical man, the animal of flesh with its desires and passions. The inner meaning of this symbol will also be explained later. 
To make the universal Pentacle correctly, place your index finger on your forehead and trace with this finger a line to your left hip, then to your right shoulder, from there to your left shoulder, thence to your right hip, and back up to your forehead again. 
The starting-point represents God; the line to the left base (or hip) is the descent of Spirit into Matter in its lowest form, whence it ascends to the right-hand angle (or shoulder) typifying matter in its highest form, the brain of man. The line from right (shoulder) to left (shoulder) represents man's development in intellect, etc., (the point of danger from which all nations have fallen into moral corruption); the line from left (shoulder) to right base (hip) signifies that actual fall. But the soul of man must struggle upwards, as is symbolised by the line reaching from the right hip to the apex (forehead), representing God, or the Source whence every man's Higher Principles issue forth. 
We have described the figure in this manner because it makes clear the way in which it must be drawn for any good purpose and it will be easy to remember it thus. Top, left base, right upper, then straight to left, down to right base, finally up to the starting point again at the top: the Universal Pentagram or Five-pointed Star of White Magic. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
