 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 44. 

Dear Disciple,
It has been assumed erroneously that Plato was entirely free from any element of Eastern Philosophy in his writings, and that every modern scholar, without being a mystic and a Kabalist himself, can pretend to be a judge of Ancient Esotericism. That Plato was undeniably an ardent admirer and follower of Pythagoras no one will deny. It is equally undeniable, as stated by Professor M.J. Matter, of the Royal Academy of Strasburg, that: "It is in Pythagoras and Plato that we find, in Greece, the first elements of Oriental Gnosticism". Plato had on the one hand inherited the doctrines of Pythagoras, and on the other hand drawn his wisdom from the same sources as the Samian Philosopher. The doctrines of Pythagoras are Oriental to the backbone, and even Brahmanical; for this great Philosopher pointed ever to the far East (where he had studied) as the source whence he derived his information and his philosophy, and Colebrooke shows that Plato makes the same profession in his 'Epistles' and says that he has taken his teachings "from ancient and sacred doctrines". Furthermore, the ideas of both Pythagoras and Plato coincide too well with the Systems of India and with Zoroastrianism to admit any doubt of their origin by anyone who has real acquaintance with these Systems. 
"Pantænus, Athenagoras and Clement were thoroughly instructed in the Platonic Philosophy, and comprehended its essential unity with Oriental Systems", as you can read in 'New Platonism and Alchemy' by Alexander Wilder, M.D. The history of Pantænus and his contemporaneous fellow Christian theologians may give the key to the Platonic, and at the same time Oriental, elements that predominate so strikingly in the Gospels and the Jewish Scriptures. The Occult Eastern Philosophy is the cornerstone of all sciences; rejected by the unwise builders even at this day, and more today perhaps than ever before, in the great conceit of our 'Scientific' Age. 
It will have become clear to you from our previous lectures in Grade 1 and 2, that Philosophy, Science, Religion, Art and Ethics are very much interwoven subjects. They lead inevitably from the Ancient Teachings of India, via Chaldea, Egypt and Greece, to the Arabian scientists and philosophers, who in their turn introduced the teachings of Alchemy and Magic into Europe during the 'Dark Ages' - which were not so 'dark' in reality - and this resulted in the European Schools of Magic, Alchemy and Philosophy of the Middle Ages. Amongst the most distinguished of these ill-understood classes, were Nostradamus, a celebrated Astronomer and expert Astrologer; Paracelsus, an excellent Physician and a Scholar, who either accidentally, or as the result of research, discovered those truths concerning mineral and animal magnetism which Mesmer subsequently reduced to a system; van Helmont, a truly prophetic person, but one who cultivated his gifts of Seership by the study and practise of Magical Arts; Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas, Arthephius, Arnold de Villeneuve, Raymond Lully, Roger Bacon, Nicholas Flammel, George Ripley and many others, practical chemists, who perceived the possibilities of Alchemy, and who distinguished themselves from the 13th to the 18th centuries in writing on this subject, and awakening the terror of the ignorant, and the denunciations of the bigoted. 
In the early part of the 15th century, the study of Alchemy and the practises of Magic became at once famous and infamous, through the influence of the celebrated Gilles de Laval (1404-1440), a Marshal of France, whose wealth, unbridled luxury and shameless debaucheries led him to the practises of Magical Art, for the sake of administering to the vilest of passions, and the replenishment of his exhausted coffers, drained by his unparalleled extravagance. As this monster in human form (of whom there was a modern example too) supplied to the fictionmongers of later times the original of the famous drama of 'Blue Beard', some idea may be formed of the vast notoriety to which his crimes attained. 
Neither the historical facts, nor the exaggerated tales which combined to render the name of Gilles de Rais memorable through all time, belong to these lectures; it is enough to add that the magical practises to which he resorted in aid of his unholy purposes contributed greatly to deepen the horror with which this art was regarded especially in an age too ignorant and priest-ridden to distinguish the nature of Occult Science from its worst abuses. 
It was during the 15th century that Henry Cornelius Agrippa flourished an adept in physical science, scholarly attainments as well as Occult Art, which made him the honoured officer of kings and princes, the friend, adviser and physician of Queens and Princesses, and the Paragon of Magicians of all Ages. It must be remembered that this distinguished Knight and great Adept was a devout Roman Catholic; hence he employed those sacred names, garments and forms which belonged to his Church, just in the same manner as the Arabians, Greeks, Egyptians and Chaldeans employed the names and formulæ of belief peculiar to their times in their magical rites. Let it be born in mind, however, that such features of each system are but the exoteric forms in which the esoteric principles are wrapped up. They have no real potency beyond the satisfaction they produce to pious minds, that they are engaged in no ceremonials displeasing to their gods, or contrary to their form of worship. 
Provided always that the Magician is duly prepared by fasting, abstinence, prayer and contemplation - provided that his magnetism is potent and his will all-powerful the 'spirits' will obey and answer 
him, whether he conjures them in the name of Buddha, Osiris, Christ or Mahomet. The true potency resides in the quantity and quality of the Astral Fluid, by which the operator furnishes means for the use of the spirits, or elementals, and the power of the Will, by which he compels beings less potent than himself to obey him. But we must add that it is almost impossible to reduce the quaint and involved style of Agrippa's writings to the comprehension of the 21st century reader! 
Happily this occurred also to another distinguished philosopher, said to be a pupil of the great Agrippa, one who, with much more perspicuity of style, undertook to reduce the magical elements of his renowned prototype into much plainer language. As there is not the slightest shadow of difference between the systems of Agrippa and Abano the latter being the pupil - except in the superior clearness of writing, and as both were translated into English in 1644 by the same scholarly editor, Robert Turner of London, we advise you to study the complete system, if you wish, in the version of Abano. There is, however, no need for you to do so, as we shall give you all the various systems in due course in these lectures. The Outer Grades of studies in our Order are necessarily only an introduction in regard to many subjects, as there are so many different things we have to deal with. 

In the study of Natural Magic, for instance, there are the various sympathetic and Occult operations, in animals, minerals and vegetables, and the study of the serpent as the allegorical term goes. Then there are to be considered Amulets, Charms and Enchantments, Unctions, Philtres, Potions and their magical virtues as well as Magical Suspensions, Alligations and Antipathies. Then there are the Occult virtues in things which are inherent in them only during their lifetime, and such as remain after death. The virtues inherent in some kinds of precious stones and the art of so-called Fascination, Binding, Candles, Lamps and many other amusing things must also be considered. We can learn something of all these things and their hidden meanings. 
In Alchemy there is the secret of the Philosopher's Stone (this latter having quite a different meaning from what is generally supposed). We must also consider the various systems of such famous men as van Helmont, Kircher, Flammel and Butler; the study of the 
Prima Materia; the Four Elements and their natural qualities; the hidden properties of fire, earth, water and air, plus Numbers, Magical Squares and Tables; the various secrets of Magnetism, Cabalistical Magic, and a host of other things. 
In our previous lectures we have already mentioned many of the great philosophers of medieval times, and we shall not make useless repetitions here, for each of them will have to be taken separately in their turn later on, but we will give you here the translation - in part of a letter to a young student in the Occult Sciences, written by Trithemius of Spanheim (1462–1516): 
"My friend, 
Knowing thee to be a curious searcher after those sciences which are out of the common track of study...... I am moved spiritually to give thee my thoughts upon them, and by these ideas here written, to open to thine eye (spiritual) as much information as it seems necessary for thee to know, by which thou mayest be led by the hand into the delectable field of nature; and to give thee such documents as, guided by the supreme Wisdom of the Highest, thou mayest refresh thy soul with a delicious draught of knowledge; so that after recreating thy spirit with the use of those good gifts which it may please God to bestow upon thee, thou mayest be wrapped up into the contemplation of the immense wisdom of that great munificent Being who created thee. 
"Now, art thou a man, in whose soul the image of Divinity is sealed for Eternity, think first what is thy desire in the searching after these mysteries! Is it wealth, honour, fame, power, might, aggrandisement and the like? Perhaps thy heart says, All! all these I would gladly crave! If so, this is my answer, seek first to know thyself thoroughly, cleanse thy heart from all wicked, vain and rapacious desires. Thinkest thou, oh man! to attain power to gratify thy lusts, to enrich thy coffers, to build houses, to raise thyself to the pinnacle of human admiration; if these are thy hopes and desires, thou hast reason to lament thy being born: all such desires are immediately from the devil, I mean that Being whose engines (i.e., myriads of demons) are continually in the act of placing sensual delights and luxuries before the depraved minds and hearts of man, and whose chief business and property it is to counteract the benevolent actions and inspirations of those blessed spirits who are the instruments of God our Creator. 
"Fear God and love thy neighbour; use no deceit, swear not, neither lie; let all thy actions be sincere. Here, O man! is the grand seal of all earthly wisdom, the true talisman of human happiness. When thou shalt accomplish this, beholding nothing will be impossible unto thee as far as God permits: then with all speed apply thy mind and heart to attain knowledge and wisdom; with all humility throw thy dependence on God alone, the author of all things that cannot die" 
Now we have quoted the above part of that letter for three reasons. Firstly, because it is a sincere letter of advice from a master to selfishness a pupil; Secondly, because it hints at an obvious danger - which induces some students to take up the investigation of 'Magic' or 'Occult' Principles, hoping thus to become great Magicians or Sorcerers in the shortest possible space of time. We have heard of some unscrupulous propounders of 'Magic' who promise their prospective victims complete mastery of the Elementals, of Astral Projection, Levitation, and what not, all within the short period of six months!! Thirdly, we have quoted this letter because, in spite of its seeming simplicity, in it are concealed some very great Occult Truths. No doubt you have found these yourself in this letter. Especially when the writer refers to God as "author of all things that cannot die", he hints at the great Laws of the undying Spirit, Eternal and Sublime, as compared with the Principles of the Material; Principles and Laws which we have been studying together now for nearly two years. 
— 
— 
You have seen already that in these seven words, "author of all things that cannot die" lie hidden sufficient secrets for the intense study of a whole lifetime. If we then take into consideration 'all the things that do die' as well, our task is doubled; for there is such an innumerable host of these latter material things - all interwoven for shorter or longer periods with things that have eternal life, that we begin to have a realisation of the Might and Wonders of Creation. Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain a grasp of the whole spiritual and Material even if we can never hope to reach complete understanding of all the details. This, then, is our task: that you and I - together shall achieve this grasp, and attain to that under- standing which will enable us to proceed a step forward on the Path of Evolution by learning to control the Material and perishable Universe by means of the undying Spirit of our Higher Mind and Soul; thus qualifying for that sublime moment when the Lords of Destiny decide that we shall have done with the Material as far as the Earth is concerned, and now commence our tasks on the higher rung of the Septenary Ladder of Being. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
