SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 47. 

Dear Disciple, 
In our last lecture we have discussed a few very simple geometrical symbols; yet, you will have noticed that these can be extended in every direction, and may have various hidden meanings. But there are great numbers of other kinds of symbols too that we must consider to a small extent now, to be discussed in greater detail later on. Let us commence with a flower this time, namely: the Rose. The exoteric meaning of this flower used as a symbol has been fully described in Ernest Crawley's famous book 'The Mystic Rose', (Macmillan & Co, 1902, reprinted 1932 and 1965), describing the various taboos, good and evil influences, according to primitive thought and culture, connected with this symbol; ceremonials, anthropomorphism, human and spiritual influence, etc., etc. But we are not concerned with that part of the symbol in these lectures, but with some of its esoteric meanings. 
The Rose is feminine; its lustrous carmine petals are guarded with thorns, and it is one of the most beautiful of flowers. The Rose is the Queen of God's Garden in the person of Mary, the Virgin. It is not the Rose alone which is the magical idea, or truth, but it is especially the crucified Rose, or the martyred Rose, in the form of the grand mystic apocalyptic figure, which is the talisman, the standard object of adoration of all the Sons of Wisdom. The Egyptian Initiates regarded the Rose as the symbol of Nature, of the ever prolific and virgin Earth, or Isis, the mother and nourisher of man, considered as feminine and represented as a virgin woman. Like every other personification of Nature and the Earth, she is the sister and wife of Osiris, as the two characters answer to the personified symbol of the Earth, both she and the Sun (Osiris) being the progeny of the same mysterious Father. And the earliest mystics taught that the Earth is fecundated by the Sun by divine insufflation. It was the pure ideal of mystic Nature that was personified in the 'World Virgins', the 'Celestial Maidens', and later on by the human Virgin Mary, the Mother of the Saviour, the Salvator Mundi chosen by the Christian world. According to Albumazar, the Arabian, she was the Virgin of the Magi and Chaldeans. The Chaldean sphere or globe showed in its heavens a newly-born babe, called Christ and Jesus; it was placed in the arms of the Celestial Virgin. It was this Virgin that Eratosthenes, the Alexandrian Librarian, born 276 years before our era, gave the name of Isis, mother of Horus. Albumazar says: "In the first decan of the Virgin rises a maid, called Aderenosa, that is pure, immaculate virgin.....sitting upon an embroidered throne, nursing a boy.....; named Jessus.....which signifies Issa, whom they also call Christ in Greek." 
Another important symbol is the horse. In Chapter 2, Kings 6-7, the deliverance of the Israelites from the Syrian hosts who were camped against them is described as being due to a miraculous sound of horses. The Jewish Scriptures and legends afford many stories of heavenly horses with angel-riders taking sides in battle, and the Jews of the age of miracles considered the all-conquering Egyptian war-horses probably as spiritual steeds, impervious to merely human weapons, so that Isaiah warns them: "Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh, and not spirits". You will all know the passage in Chapter 2, in the second book of Kings, verse 11, where it says: "And it came to pass, as they (i.e., Elijah and Elisha) still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven". 
Zechariah records two visions of horses which seem to be guardian angels of the world. The Old Testament contains many references to horses. And there are stories of angelic horses during all ages, and when in 1427, on the 6th of May, Joan of Arc, The Maid of Orléans, took the fortress of the Tourelles from the English at the siege of Orléans, the forms of the Archangel Michael and of Aignan, the patron saint of the city were seen mounted on white chargers and fighting on the side of the French. We have the story too of St. James, when the Spanish army under King Ferdinand defeated the Moors in Estremadura; hence the favourite battle cry of the Spaniards being 'Sant Iago' (St. James), for he appeared among them on a snow-white steed and led them to victory when the battle was almost lost. Even in our own days there is the famous story of the battle of Mons, when England's patron Saint, St. George, appeared in the sky, and the Germans abandoned their positions in precipitate terror. And in other circumstances too, men had written about seeing clouds of Celestial Horsemen hovering over the British lines. Russians, Italians, Mahommedans, Indians and, in fact, every nation has similar stories. 
Then there are 'fairy horses', demon horses, ghostly horses, sun horses, moon horses, wind- and sea-horses, night horses, the horse in charms and incantations, centaurs, hyppogryphs and unicorns, and so on. Perhaps courage was the quality of the horse that appealed most to early peoples, and we frequently find the steed used as an emblem of this virtue. See the Book of Job (Chapter 39, verses 19-25) for a matchless description of the horse. The horse has been a favourite emblem of speed too, and of pride. But Zechariah, foretelling the coming of Christ, says He will be "lowly, riding on an ass". That is, He will not come as a military conqueror, who would of course be on 
horseback. And wishing further to emphasise the peaceful character of Christ's reign, he says: "I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem". 
By the ancient Assyrians and Babylonians the horse is often described as "glorious in war", and they knew it not as a beast of burden. According to the Code of meanings found in the Talmud, to dream of a white horse is good, whether moving or stationary; but a chestnut or dark horse is only good if it is stationary. Any movement tells of evil. In British symbology the dark horse indicates uncertainty, mystery, etc. 
Thus the horse in general is a Symbol of War, and those mystics who are so fond of telling of their visions and dreams of horses, with or without riders, should remember that the first duty of a mystic or an occultist is to seek Peace, and instead of being proud of such visions, which they interpret as direct messages from the Higher Realms, indicating their great spiritual progress, they should take them as warnings that they are still lacking in those qualities which are the most difficult to attain, namely: Balance, Goodwill, Kindness, Equilibrium, Calm, Poise, each of which is the antithesis of War..... which should be left to the worldly-minded and to those who long for material Power. 
Our next symbol is the Serpent; and this is of very vast importance and has a great variety of meanings. We have previously referred to this symbol in connection with Wisdom, Eternity, etc. But it also stands for Royalty, for deceit, for healing; it appears as a portent of security in divine protection in the Christian symbol of the serpent and the anchor; more often replaced nowadays by a rope around an anchor. The Christian Churches of today regard the Serpent as being solely an emblem of evil, or its personification: the Devil. This is due to a misunderstanding of its deep and double significance which formerly gave it a position of the highest honour and importance in religious typology, and made of it the symbol to represent the Deity as ALL. The learned Egyptian Gnostics of "The Brotherhood of the Serpent' adopted it as their emblem. 
It is the same with this as with so many other symbols, and even words. The antagonism between Set and Horus of the Egyptians was originally a poetic conception of the amicable and eternal rivalry between night and day. Since then Set has become the devil, but in the Gypsy language the name for God is still 'devel'; and the French name for Hell is Enfer, the One Fire, or the Sun......symbolising God! 
The poet of the Psalm 139 describes even the darkness of Hell as hiding not God; and the Egyptians entitled Osiris in one sense as "Lord of the uttermost limit of everything"; which therefore includes Hell. And the abode of the serpent Satan, or the active energising power of God, is a Hell of Fire, produced by the intensity of his creative Forces, warring with formlessness, cold and inertia. On the physical Plane, this Hell is the Sun, the central Fire which is the source and preserver of life in our Solar System. Hence the Solar Serpent on the Gnostic gems! 
M. Jules Baissac speaks of Satan in a cosmic sense, as the "Centrifugal Energy of the Universe" (what Hell, Sun, Fire etc., really are is the subject of deep future study in our Order, the true Cosmic Laws of God being utterly Divine and Marvellous), and he points out that life hibernates, or dies out, and contracts under the influence of cold, thought itself congeals, and fire is extinguished. Satan is immortal in his own Fire-Sea - it is only in the 'Niflheim' (the frozen Hell of the Scandinavians) that he cannot exist. But for all that there is a kind of Immortal Existence in the Niflheim, and that existence must be painless and peaceful, because it is Unconscious and Inactive. It is remarkable that this frozen Hell, like its antithesis, the fiery Hell, is full of Serpents, the emblems of the Divine; but here, instead of being active, they form a wall, so evidently are in a passive state, probably of hibernation. 
 
The Serpent (or Dragon, for the symbols are interchangeable) represents the light of manifested, and therefore limited, consciousness, as opposed to the Light of the Immortal and Unbodied. But although the reverse it is yet the same in origin and in ending. It is - and what but the One, now as Lucifer, descending into limitation limitation is all the sin and sorrow of which we are conscious? - now, again transcending materiality, enriched and enabled by this experience of Its opposite, to realise more of Itself. 

"Are God and Nature then at strife?" was the bitter cry wrung from humanity, and voiced by a great poet in an age of questioning and doubt, as one by one idols proved to have feet of clay. 
"No", comes the answer from Sages of the past; "look deeper, brothers! God and Nature, Good and Evil, Spirit and Matter are not at enmity. They are not even two. They are ONE"! 
In all we may find the Divine. Though all that we now are is consumed with Its burning, fiery breath in deepest anguish, yet we are glad and triumphant. It is the Absolute Love making us One with Itself! 
All this and more is embodied in the mystic hieroglyph of the Serpent swallowing its own tail, which was possibly the earliest symbol known to, or imagined by man. The Serpent is herein shown as a circle, representative of the Eternity of God and a subtle emblem of immortality. Even if we regard it still as a viper it can now be thought of as destroying itself by its own venom. Seen thus, it symbolises the suicide of Death Mort à la Mort, or, as Shakespeare has it: "...death once dead, there's no more dying then" (Sonnet 146). 
The Phoenician Serpent with its tail in its mouth may perhaps originally have been a mere mythic world-snake, like the Midgard Serpent of Scandinavian Mythology; but later it was adopted as the emblem of eternity, probably because Fanus, the god of the year, was represented by the figure of a snake swallowing its tail to symbolise the rebirth of the New Year from the old. Fanus was also the guardian deity of travellers, and here the symbol would indicate their returning home and setting forth anew. 
Perhaps the most remarkable fact in the history of Ophiolatry is its Christian revival, or rather survival among the Gnostics. The Ophites, or Oriental emblematical Serpent worshippers, were a Gnostic body of very early origin which became especially prominent in the second century. Their life, however, was but a brief one, for they appear to have ceased to exist about the sixth century, and we owe our knowledge of them chiefly to Irenaeus, Clement, Origen and Hyppolitus. Their members derived their name from their doctrine that the Serpent which tempted Eve, was no devil, but the impersonation of Divine Wisdom, the great Teacher and Civiliser of the human race, the parent and author of all knowledge and science. 

The Ophites believed the Creator of the material world was a being subordinate and even antagonistic to the Supreme God limited and limiting deity, proud, revengeful and jealous - in fact, the Jehovah of the Jewish race, whose character expresses itself in the Old Testament which proceeded from him. 
To this inferior deity the Ophites gave the name of the Demiurge, or World-Former, and Ildabaoth, or Son of Darkness. They asserted that his empire was the starry world, and that the stars represented the cosmical principle, which seeks to hold the spirit of man in bondage and servitude, and to environ it with all manner of delusions. They further asserted that at the beginning of all things is Sabaoth, or Victory; at the end, the “Old Serpent" (Ophis). Between these are the Seraphim (Intelligences) and Cherubim (Benevolences), and their representatives. 
Ildabaoth and the angels begotten by him are the Spirits of the Seven Planets. 
In order to keep his six angels in subjection to himself and prevent their looking higher and discovering the wonderful realm of spiritual light above them, Ildabaoth endeavoured to fix their attention elsewhere, and to this end called upon them to create man in their own image, and so prove their independent creative power. They did so, but could not give a soul to the form they produced, so brought it to Ildabaoth to animate. 
The Demiurge breathed a living spirit into the lifeless shape his angels had made, but as he did so, all unperceived by himself, the spiritual seed passed from his own being into the nature of man, and he was deprived of this higher principle of life. He saw with amazement and wrath that a creature created by himself, within his own kingdom, was rising above both himself and his kingdom. His aim was now to prevent man gaining consciousness of his higher nature, and so he issued the command to the first man that he should not eat the fruit of the tree of knowledge. 
But Divine Wisdom had all this time been watching and at this point employed the Serpent as an instrument (or, even according to some leaders of these sects, Itself assumed the Serpent's form), to defeat the cruel purpose of Ildabaoth, by tempting the first man to disobedience. 
Next week we shall continue this theme. 
This Lecture is the end of another step forward, and there is now but one more step to complete the Second Grade. If there are any questions we shall be pleased to hear from you. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
