SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 2. Number 4. 
1 
Dear Disciple, 
Among the Eastern Occultists the ceaseless and eternal Cosmic Motion, or rather the Force that moves it, is called OEAOHOO, and also OI-HA-HOU, a circular wind, or whirlwind; this Force is tacitly accepted as the Deity, but never named as such; it is the ever-acting Cause. 
To pronounce a word is to evoke a thought and make it present; for the magnetic potency of human speech is the commencement of every manifestation in the Occult World. To utter a Name is not only to define a Being, but to place it under, and condemn it through the emission of the Word or Verbum to the influence of one or more Occult Potencies. Things are, for every one of us, that which the Word makes them while naming them. That word or the speech of every man is, quite unconsciously to himself, a blessing or a curse; this is the reason why the present ignorance of man about the properties and attributes of matter is often fatal. Names and words are either beneficent or maleficent; in a certain sense they can be venomous or health-giving, according to the hidden influences attached by Supreme Wisdom to their elements. When you utter a word, or words, you put something in motion; according to the sound you thus create, and the idea behind it you produce black or white magic. There are many peoples in or from the East who will never under any circumstances discuss any future disaster that might happen; and they avoid too, as much as possible, the mentioning of any unpleasant thing or event that has happened. 
Here is another reason why you should dwell on PEACE without ceasing if you possibly can, for it will bring you a Secret Power! Sir Francis Bacon once said words to the effect that it was good for the human system to fly in a rage at least once a day, for this would set all the bodily juices circulating rapidly, thus creating a healthy condition! Nothing anyone has ever said could be more wrong and pernicious, and you will all agree with us. 
In the ancient teachings it is stated that: "It is through and from the radiations of the Seven Bodies of the Seven Orders of Dhyanis (a generic name for spiritual Beings ranging from the Planetary Logos to any of the lower Orders of Spiritual Entities), that the Seven Discrete Quantities (or Elements), whose Motion and Harmonious Union produce the manifested Universe of Matter, are born." The full meaning of this sentence will be discussed later, but for our present purposes we would like to draw your attention to the word 'Motion'. With the Higher Beings this Motion is necessarily harmonious, they themselves being all harmony; but we must not forget that motion can be used in an inharmonious manner too, producing conditions the reverse of good. Hence our warning about 'Words' by means of which we not only attune with 'Conditions', but actually bring them about and draw them towards us. 
The appearances and disappearances of a Kosmos or a Universe are pictured in the Occult Doctrines as outbreathings and inbreathings of the 'Great Breath' which is eternal, and which, being Motion, is one of the three Symbols of the Absolute Abstract Space and Duration being the other two. When the Great Breath is projected it is called the Divine Breath, and is regarded as the breathing of the Unknowable Deity - the One Existence which breathes out a Thought, as it were, which becomes a Kosmos or a Universe. But when the Divine Breath is inspired, the Kosmos or the Universe disappears into the bosom of the 'Great Mother', who sleeps "wrapped in her Ever-invisible Robes." 
Both modes of the 'waking' and 'sleeping' of a Kosmos or a Universe are perfect and complete, as are the waking and sleeping states of man. The German Philosopher Fichte distinguished Being as One, which we know only through Existence as the Manifold. This is a complete Hermetic axiom; and true. 
The active Power, the 'Perpetual Motion of the Great Breath', only awakens Kosmos at the dawn of every new Period, setting it into Motion by means of the two contrary Forces, the centripetal and the centrifugal Forces, which are male and female, positive and negative, spiritual and physical, the two forming the One Primordial Force, and thus causing it to become objective on the Planes of Illusion; and this was mirrored in the appearance of the male-female early race of humankind as we told you before. In other words, that dual motion transfers Kosmos from the Plane of the Eternal Ideal into that of finite Manifestation, or from the noumenal to the phenomenal Planes. 
If we read Sir Isaac Newton's works in a fair and unprejudiced spirit, we shall see that they are an ever ready witness to show how he must have hesitated between gravitation and attraction, impulse, and some other unknown cause to explain the regular course of the planetary motion; see his "Treatise on Colour' (Vol. 3. Question 31). 
We are told by Herschell that Newton left with his successors the duty of drawing all the scientific conclusions from his discovery. How modern Science has abused the privilege of building its theories upon the law of gravitation, may be realised when one remembers how profoundly religious that great man was. If gravitation were dethroned tomorrow, the Scientists would discover some other new mode of mechanical motion the day after. 

The materialistic notion that because, in Physics, real and sensible motion is impossible in pure space or vacuum, therefore, the eternal Motion of and in Kosmos regarded as infinite space fiction, only shows once more that such expressions of Eastern metaphysics as 'pure space', 'pure being', the 'Absolute', etc., have never been understood in the West. But Occult Science has no objection to the conception of Motion as found in Herbert Spencer's 'Unknowable' in the form of the 'Great Breath'. 
Newton's conception of gravitation was expressed by his statement to the effect that every particle of matter attracts every other particle with a force proportional to the product of the masses and to the inverse square of the distance. One of the scientific publications states in reference to this: "We are thus left to picture an infinitely complex network of attractions joining every two particles in the Universe and tending to pull them together. Newton did not specify what the 'particles' were assumed to be, whether atoms or otherwise." 
Thus Science still stands helpless in the face of the great problem of gravitation; and it always will, for there is no such thing! Faraday introduced a somewhat different picture in the form of a stressed medium, with its curved lines and tubes of force. The Einstein concept, again, envisages a space so warped by the presence of surrounding masses that a particle, which if projected into an empty space would follow a straight line, actually follows a more or less complicated curve, a geodesic line of this warped space, which represents physically the most direct path between any two points of the space. Furthermore, Einstein's equivalence principle makes no distinction between gravitation and centrifugal force. Various more or less complicated formulæ expressing the 'intensity' of gravity as a function of latitude and altitude have been proposed by Clairant, Helmert, Hayford and others, but these must always be modified 
says Science to suit local conditions of topography and density of the Earth's crust. 
— 
In other words: Science is 'all in the air', so to say, about the 'law of Gravity' (which is no law, as it does not exist), and we think that the time is almost ripe for a new mechanical contraption which will try in vain once more to explain the spiritual (without acknowledging it) by material means. It just can't be done!! The Student might look up in any good modern encyclopædia or scientific text book the subjects of dynamics and motion and discover for himself how little Science knows about these phenomena, although it is not imperative for him to do so, as the result will be negative in any case. 
Now what is Motion? 
Shall we say that Force is 'moving Matter', or 'Matter in Motion', and a manifestation of Energy? Or that Matter and Force are the phenomenal differentiated aspects of the one primary undifferentiated Cosmic Substance? Occult Science answers these questions by reference to Fohat and his "Seven brothers or Sons," in other words, the cause and the effects of Cosmic Electricity, of which only the phenomenal and grossest effects are as yet recognised by material science. Electricity, light, heat, etc., have been aptly termed the 'Ghosts or Shadows of Matter in Motion', i.e., supersensuous states of Matter whose effects only we are able to cognise. 
How does the Universe move, and how do its Forces correlate? The only answer lies in the Teachings and explanations of Occult Science, and — the blind inertia of Physical Science being replaced by the intelligent active Powers behind the Veil of Matter Motion and inertia become subservient to those Powers. It is a mistake of those who know nothing of the universality of the Occult Doctrines from the very cradle of the human Races, and especially so of those scholars who reject the very idea of a 'primordial revelation', to teach the Anima Mundi, the One Life or Universal Soul, was made known only by Anaxagoras, or during his age. This Philosopher brought the Teachings forward simply to oppose the too materialistic conceptions of Democritus on Cosmogony, based on the exoteric theory of blindly driven atoms. Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, however, was not its inventor, but only its propagator, as was also Plato. That which he called Mundane Intelligence, or Nous, the Principle that according to his views is absolutely separated and free from Matter and acts with design, was called Motion, the One Life, or Jīvātmā, in India, ages before the year 500 B.C. 
Only, the Aryan philosophers never endowed this Principle, which with them is infinite, with the infinite attribute of finite self- consciousness. For how can the Absolute attain this otherwise than simply as an aspect, the highest of which aspects known to humans is human consciousness? 
It is the Sun-fluids or emanations that impart all motion and awaken all into life in the Solar System from a material point of view, or according to material laws. It is attraction and repulsion, but not as understood in modern Physics or according to the law of gravity, but in harmony with the laws of 'Manvantaric Motion', designed from the Dawn of the rebuilding and higher reformation of the System. These laws are immutable; but the motion of all the bodies motion is diverse and alters with every minor world-cycle regulated by the Movers, the Intelligences within the Cosmic Soul. 

You should study this Lecture carefully, for it contains a great deal that will be of importance in our future studies of the great Laws. This Lecture completes the First Step in Grade 2. We shall be glad to have your report on the meditation exercises, and if there are any questions you may send them to us in the usual manner. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
P. S. We feel it worth noting that since this Lecture was written, Science has now confirmed that 'Space' is not a vacuum; that in fact interplanetary Space is the arena for a surging web of interpenetrating forces and energies of extraordinary subtlety and complexity. 
- 
— 
The million mph Solar Wind and Currents Whirlwinds indeed which have now being charted, make interesting reading, especially when linked with the first and last but one paragraphs of this Lecture. 
