SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 2. Number 50. 
Beloved Student, 
Once again it is my very great pleasure to address you personally, and this time I wish to congratulate you on your sincerity and persever- ance, for you 
have now finished the Second Grade, or the Second Year of the great Outer Triangle of the Years of our Studies. 

You will have realised that the Teachings of the Second Grade are of a far higher, as well as deeper and inner nature than those of Grade One. This is as it should be, and you will be ready to admit that as you have kept faith with us, so have we your Hidden Masters and I kept faith with you, and given you the full measure of Information promised in our Manifesto....and over. There are many things in the Second Grade, just as there were in the First, only more so, that you could not possibly have learnt elsewhere; for some of our laws and Teachings are known to us only, and to no one else. 
We hope that the Teachings have given you many happy moments during these last two years. And we ask you sincerely to try to pass on some of that happiness to others not in our Order. For as Sir James Barrie once said: "Those who bring sunshine into the lives of others cannot keep it from themselves". I do not mean that you should reveal our Teachings to anyone not in our Order, but we want you to try to make others happy by letting them see that you are happy on account of all your concentrations on Peace and other good things. And even if things are such at times that they make you feel sad, turn at once to that sublime Principle of Peace and spread it all around you, for thus you will dwell within the very centre of its atmosphere and radiations, and be as a Light unto the World. 
This is the Light of True Love, and General Bramwell Booth stated a great Truth when he said that: "True Love can do anything....... but change". For Love is Truth, and how could Truth ever change? Therefore if you dwell not in Illusion; and it is our great Aim to get beyond the Illusion of the Material Planes; yea! of all the Four, and reach out to the true Realms of Pure Spirit, where the Hosts of Love and Truth await our coming - which is a returning Home with loving anticipation. 

The Three Planes beyond the Earth are often called the Astral Planes, although we call them Planes 2, 3 and 4, in order to avoid confusion. What sort of Beings dwell within or upon these Planes? To make this clear to you will take time, and your Masters of Grade 3 and of the Inner Circle later on, will have to tell you many marvellous things about these planes, Realms, Worlds or Regions. In the lectures dealing with the Paths of the Sun and Moon you have already been given a few introductory hints on the dwellers in the Astral-Material Planes. But the real study of these regions has not yet commenced; this you may have sensed already. 
When we speak of the Beings that dwell in those regions, we are not thinking solely of so-called 'disembodied' humans. In the first place no one who 'passes on', as the saying has it, is ever 'disembodied'. True, we leave behind on Earth our material human body when we have done with it; but does anyone really believe that this human body is our real and only vehicle for the Vital Spark and Higher Mind? We hope every one of us has more sense than that, for to believe it would be pandering to Illusion. The word 'Illusion' has been used a good many times in our teachings as you know. You may remark: "Yes, it is all very well to say that all on Earth and in the Three Planes beyond it is Illusion, but how do you know it is so, and how are you going to prove it?" This would be an excellent query, and I want to answer it here and now. 
The first part of the query is: "how do you know?" This is very easily answered, for we your Teachers and Heads of The Order know by experience. "Very well", you might retort, "but how are you going to prove it?" Again the reply is very easy; we shall not have to prove it at all - for you yourself will prove it to yourself as soon as you have acquired the necessary technique, and this you can do in one way or another (each person differently) if you practise our exercises and meditations persistently, without putting up the smoke-screen of doubt and unbelief each time you obtain a glimpse of that which lies beyond the material veils and barriers. We are glad to say that a goodly number of our students have seen beyond the veil already on many occasions during the last two years with us. Some came to us with their clairvoyant and clairaudient faculties already developed to a lesser or greater extent. Others knew nothing at all of these things but have since learnt certain important laws, and have had certain personal experiences. Some have parted the veils by means of the colour and sound exercises; others were successful on account of their concentration on the candle and other auras; yet others saw 'through the mirror' (Lecture 47 of Grade 1), or obtained views by means of meditation and deep concentration. There have been some who were successful by raising their faculties of thinking; others by 'losing themselves' in the contemplation of beauty, natural or otherwise, and by concentrating their sight on a beautiful and sparkling jewel - which is another means of 'escape'. 
All had different experiences and saw and heard different things. The reading of really fine literature, poetry or prose, also helps, and there are as many ways of escape to the Higher Realms as there are persons who are sufficiently evolved to have earned that great privilege and blessing. Now what did they see in those Regions; and what have we ourselves beheld in them? We are not going to reveal this here, for we shall do better still if we sit at the feet of the great and often unknown Sages of Antiquity, and listen to their Wisdom in preference to ours; thus cutting out the personal element as far as The Order is concerned for that is ever our foremost and greatest Principle. It would be easy to dazzle you with many wonderful stories of our experiences, but we think that you will agree with our decision not to do so. 
 
Now when we listen to the Ancient Wisdom we shall learn in time that the Astral Regions of Planes 2, 3 and 4 are full of Spirits. If we interpret this in the usual sense of either Religion, Philosophy, Spiritualism and other similar Systems of Thought, we shall obtain but a minute fraction of the Truth. Apart from the 'spirits' of departed humans, and apart from 'Angels', 'Masters', 'demi-gods', 'genii', 'Planetary Spirits', 'Logoi', etc., etc., there are vast hosts and multitudes of still different beings in those Realms. Some are full of intelligence, though not to be classed with those mentioned in the previous sentence; others are semi-intelligent; some are blind forces used by the Intelligences; others are those who must be classified as 'nature-spirits' of all sorts; yet others are no more nor less than semi-personified laws and principles - strange as this term may seem to you; and above all these latter hover the great Devas, Builders, Architects and their master-workmen, who handle and manipulate the various forces and principles, conscious, sub-conscious or un-conscious. 
You will note that the subject is assuming vast and complicated dimensions; but on the other hand the forces we shall deal with at first will still be only those connected with the four lower Planes of the Seven Divine Planes connected with the Earth, and not with any other planets or globes, as yet. Yet the Earth is only a small speck in our Solar System, while our Solar System is a still smaller speck - in comparison with our own Universe.... which is an infinitesimal speck in the great Galaxy of Universes to which ours belongs. You see that the larger the body is we are speaking of, the smaller it becomes in comparison with the great ones! Yet when we think of the Great Solar System of an Atom, we can be truly awed by the picture of its grandeur!! Does this bring home to you something of the great Illusion of it all? 
 
Now on the Planes of Being within the Atom we find the same Laws as those of the Solar System; and when we speak of our Globe- the Earth -and its Septenary System of Planes above and below, we are giving you the same Laws that apply to an electron, which, as you know, is one of the Atomic Planets that whirls around its nucleus or Sun. Please bear this in mind in view of the coming Lectures. 

The Sun of Truth remains for ever the same, but its radiant beams are broken and often distorted in the minds of men. Those who can see only the distorted image in the mirror of their imagination mistake it for Truth itself, and they live in Illusion; but those who can behold the Shining Glory and the Golden Flame see Truth as it is; they have found Actuality and dwell in Wisdom. If we want to find the Light of Truth we must seek it where it exists and not where it cannot be known. It cannot be discovered by means of the material intellect or the material imagination of the brain which is but part of the lower mind itself. Seek it within the inner heart of your being, which is the everlasting fountain of Truth deep within your Self, which is the centre of your own Universe. Seek it with an unselfish mind, for only to him who asks not shall all be given. Acquire Self-Knowledge, attain the true consciousness of the Higher Mind, by means of which you will become free from all earthly cares of the everlasting Illusion which is the Lower Mind of man. Thus you will dwell in the Realm of Light, where all speculation ceases and where also dwells Peace, Tranquillity and eternal Happiness. That is the Region where you can find your own, there is no loneliness nor sorrow there, for those two deceivers will melt away like a shadow in the rays of the Sun. The outer Self is that to which the lower mind clings with despairing grip, not realising its worthlessness in the Light of Eternal Life. As the Sun ever stays in its own place, sending its reflected light to all the worlds of its System, tranquil and unapproachable in its luminous Splendour, so do its rays chase the phantoms and shadows of the material world. Plutarch has said that every man has a soul and that it does not mingle with the bodies of different men in the same manner. Only the vulgar and ignorant imagine that the whole of their soul dwells within their human vehicle. For such believe that the image reflected in a mirror is within that glass, but the intelligent person will know it to be different. 

Life is not the product of the living body, any more than air is the product of the lungs. It is a manifestation of what is to man an invisible and universal power of Life, which creates all forms and without which no form can come into being or continue to exist. This Law is the same on all the seven planes, above or below - except that the lowest one of all is the Realm of Eternal Death. 

Science of the material brain perceives only the outward form, but the Wisdom of the Soul beholds the inner Truth of which the Higher Mind may partake at will. 
Bulwer-Lytton says in Zanoni: "Of all the weaknesses which little men rail against, there is none that they are more apt to ridicule than the tendency to believe. And of all the signs of a corrupt heart and a feeble head, the tendency of incredulity is the surest . . . Real Philosophy seeks rather to solve than to deny . . . Every thought is a Soul". 


When in our coming lectures you read about the different inhabitants of the Astral Regions, remember always that the so-called the same as man 'Elementals' are but modifications of matter. himself in his lower mind! But the Sphere of the Higher Mind is luminous, when nothing external has contact with it, and when it has projected to the Highest Realms. It is then lit by its own Light — which is the Light of its 'Star' or Soul. This Light has been called the Augoeides the luminous Soul - and is part of the Solar Logos of the 'Ray' on which it functions through the Logos. The 'Star' under which a human Entity is born will remain its Star throughout the whole cycle of its incarnations in one Manvantara. But this refers to the Augoeides, and not to his Astrological star. The latter is concerned only with the outer personality; the former with the inner and true individuality. The Lord or Angel of that Star will be either the guiding, or perhaps only the presiding Angel in every rebirth of the human inner Entity, which latter is part of the Angel's own Essence, though the man himself may be completely ignorant of this fact . . . and generally is ignorant of it. Bulwer-Lytton gives a beautiful and true description of such a being in Zanoni: ". . . there emerged . . . a luminous and gigantic column, glittering and shifting. It resembled the shining but misty spray which, seen afar off, a fountain seems to send up on a starry night. . . From the column there emerged a shape of unimaginable glory. Its face was that of a man in its first youth, but solemn, as with the consciousness of eternity and the tranquillity of wisdom; light, like starbeams, flowed through its transparent veins; light made its limbs themselves, and undulated, in restless sparkles, through the waves of its dazzling hair". 

This Angel is also called the 'Father-Soul', or the 'Father-Fire', and dwells, of course, in one of the three highest Realms. In the Vedanta, this Lord, Logos, Angel or Star is called Ishvara, and it is considered to be the highest possible consciousness in Nature (the Universe), or in each separate Kosmos within a Universe. Ordinary consciousness is only a synthetic unit in the manifested material realms, the Planes of Illusion. Shankaracharya warns: “O wise man, remove the conception that Not-Spirit (i.e., material consciousness) is Spirit".
 
When you study the Astral Realms and its inhabitants on the Four lower Divine Planes, you will then make the acquaintance of all the 'Spirits' that dwell there who are 'Not-Spirits', but considered true Spirits by those who do not know the real Truth. Allow me therefore to wish you all possible success in the coming studies, in full and true consciousness that the Star of your Soul, its Divine Light, is ever present with you in order to illuminate your path, and act as the guide of your Higher Mind whenever you turn to that Light in full trust and confidence. Its sacred Eye will watch your progress; its Holy Voice will whisper good counsel within the airy chambers of your inner ear; there will be the sounds of many instruments of music in the living silence, and you will know the Numbers of the Shining Host and know that God is ONE, ever Blessed and blessing, great, good and powerful in His Sublime Majesty. 

ANTARES. 
Supreme Grand Master. 
Dear Disciple, 
And permit me, your Hidden Master, too, to add my good wishes to those of our beloved Hierophant, and to thank you for your valued cooperation during the last two years. May our bonds of mutual research and study of the Mysteries be ever strengthened in our faithful Quest for the LIGHT on this Plane and on those to come. 
Your Hidden Master. 
