SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 4. 
Dear Disciple, 
You will have noticed that we have approached the subject of the Beings who dwell in the Astral Planes from an unusual angle in the first three lectures of this Grade; the same as we have dealt with everything in Grade 1 and 2 in an original and interesting way. This does not mean that we are not going to give you a great many items of information about the Beings in the Septenary Astral World; but we have a unique system of arriving at the Truths we teach you, so that when the final word has been written you will understand, and not feel that you have been left "in the air" about anything you should know. There is further our personal system of dealing with any questions that may arise in our personal letters to our students. You will never have any questions answered by 'Form-Letters', as other Orders do; for those form letters tell you exactly nothing you want to know, but deal in a casual way with generalities. 

Before we come to the 'Beings' in the Astral Worlds, we must first see what are the 'tools' they use in order to 'Create' anything in the manifested material universe. You have read in our lectures the words 'Fire', Flame', 'Water of Life', and so on. All these are, on our Plane the progeny and the correlations of Astral Electricity; the sacred generator of a no less sacred progeny; of Fire the Creator, the the Essence of our Divine Preserver and Destroyer; of Light Ancestors; of Flame the "soul" of things, or the animating principle. Electricity is the One Life at the upper rung of Being, and Astral Fluid, the Athanor of the Alchemists, at the lower; God and Devil, Good and Evil, as Madame Blavatsky has stated so truly. 

"Light" is called "Cold Flame", when the great Astral Light is meant. It is the Energy that actuates Matter after its first formation into atoms; it is generated by Cosmic Heat, or Fohat, and until this is done there can be no Kosmos. 
The first Primordial Matter, eternal and coeval with Space, which has neither beginning nor end, the same as Time, is neither hot nor cold. Heat and cold are relative qualities and pertain to the realms of the manifested worlds. Primordial Matter, before it emerges from the plane of the never-manifesting, and awakens to the thrill of action under the impulse of Fohat, is but a cool radiance, formless, tasteless and devoid of every quality and aspect. It is inert, and life lies dormant within it. It cannot manifest in any way but must wait for that great energising power of Fohat to awaken it to life and activity. Fohat, by itself alone, cannot act either; for energy without matter upon which it that can work is just as "unmanifest" as matter without energy. Matter is the female aspect of nature; Fohat the male; the first is negative and the second positive. It is only when the two rush together that between them one supplementing and completing the other "creation" can commence. After Primordial Matter has been awakened by Fohat her "Firstborn", the "Four Sons who are One and become Seven", come into being. They are the entities whom the Eastern Occultists called the four of the seven "Centres of Force", that developed later into the great Cosmic "Elements". The four "Primal Natures" of the first Dhyan Chohans, the "Sons of God" who themselves become Creators, are the so-called Akashic, Ethereal, Watery and Fiery Elements. These Elements are both electro-positive and electro-negative, and are most effective and active when energised on the Plane of more grossly differentiated matter. By means of these Elements (unknown to Science), the 'Gods' weave the garments of matter in which the manifested material planes are clothed. 
When the Breath of Fohat is upon Primordial Matter the Kosmos expands, and Fohat, gathering the clusters of cosmic matter in the form of nebulae, gives them an impulse and sets them in motion, which motion develops heat, after which Fohat leaves the rotating mass (or masses) to follow its own growth. 
The Esoteric Theogony begins with the One Manifested (therefore not eternal in its presence and being, if eternal in its Essence), the Number of the Numbers and Numbered, the Hidden Logos of the Kosmos or Solar System, the 'Numbers' proceeding from the female Principle or Matter. The number of the Hidden Logos is 1, and that of the female Principle 0. The first is the positive Spirit of Life, the second negative Matter; the 1 and the 0 combined forms the figure 10 or the word IO, which has been turned into IAO, the secret name of God which was whispered into the ear of the Initiate by the Hierophant after the former's great test in the 'Mysteries' in Egypt - and from this number 10 the whole Kosmos, as well as the whole Universe, proceeds. 
 
Next we see Cosmic Matter scattering and forming itself into Elements; grouping into the Mystic Four within the Fifth Element Aether the "lining" of Primordial Substance, the World-Soul and Mother of Kosmos. The Elements mingle and produce compound elements, and all is incessant motion, geometrical forms being correlated in fiery dots, lines, triangles, cubes, circles and finally Spheres; there is no place for accident or chance. Motion (the Breath) becomes the Whirlwind and sets everything into rotation. If you refer to Lecture No.8 of Grade 2 where we mention one of the ancient commentaries to the most important Book on the Secret Science, you will see how it all links up with our present discussion. 
univeIn the Ancient Teachings it says: "When the One becomes Two, the Threefold appears. The Three are One". This saying will be clear to you now: for 1 is Spirit, and by projecting its Fire into Matter it becomes Two and the Three-fold appears; to wit: when the One Eternal drops its reflection into the region of Manifestation, that Reflection, the Ray, differentiates the Water of Space. As it says in the Book of the Dead: "Chaos (0) ceases, through the effulgence of the Ray of the Primordial Light (1) dissipating total darkness, by the help of the great magic Power of the Word of the (Central) Sun". Chaos becomes male-female, and Water, incubated by Light, and the Three-fold Being issues as its "First-Born". "Ra (or Osiris-Ptah) creates his own Limbs (like Brahma) by creating the Gods destined to personify his Phases", during the Cycle. The Egyptian Ra, issuing from the Deep, is the divine Universal Soul in its manifested aspect; it represents that portion of the "Spirit of God" sent outwards to the inferior worlds (the manifested) to vivify and harmonise them. He is concealed in Primordial Substance and present in Aether. This is the metaphysical explanation, and refers to the very beginning of Evolution, or Theogony. 
Seven 'Heavens', Zones or Planes are formed of which Iao is the Chief. (The Gnostics affirmed that these Seven Heavens are intelligent, and speak of them as being Angels; in other words: the Seven Planes are ruled by the Seven Sons of God, the Planetary Spirits under Iao, who thus is the Hidden Logos, and the same as Iao the Mystery God and Regent of the Moon). 
All the Kabalists and Occultists, Eastern and Western, recognise the identity of "Father-Mother" (IO) with Primordial Aether, or Astral Light, and its homogeneity before the evolution of the "Son", cosmically Fohat, for it is Cosmic Electricity. "Fohat hardens and scatters the Seven Brothers", says the Ancient Teaching, which means that the Primordial Electric Entity (for the Eastern Occultists insist that Cosmic Electricity is an Entity) electrifies into life, and separates primordial stuff or pregenetic matter into atoms, themselves the source of all manifested life and lower consciousness. This Fohat, this Cosmic Electricity, is recognised as the universal agent of all forms of life; active and passive, positive and negative, like day and night. It is the first Light in Creation, the "first light" of the primordial Elohim; the 'Adam' "male and female". The ancients represented it by a Serpent, for "Fohat hisses as he glides hither and thither", in zigzags. 
The Kabalah figures it with the Hebrew letter Teth, whose symbol is the serpent which played such a prominent part in the Mysteries. Its universal value is nine, for it is the ninth letter of the alphabet, and the ninth door of the fifty portals, or gateways, that lead to the concealed mysteries of being. It is the magical agent par excellence, and designates in Hermetic Philosophy "Life infused into Primordial Matter", the essence that composes all things, and the spirit that determines their forms. 
It was not Zeno, the founder of the Stoics, alone, who taught that the Universe evolves, and its primary substance is transformed from the state of fire into that of air, then into that of water, etc. You know that Heraclitus of Ephesus maintained that the one principle that underlines all phenomena in Nature is fire. The intelligence that moves the Universe is Fire (therefore Motion being a substance, or Matter), and that Fire is Intelligence; this also being matter in one sense. 
The first product of Primordial Substance is called Mahat, or Universal Intelligence, whose characteristic progeny is that faculty above the ratiocinating mind which is Pure Reason; subjectively it is the Monad or Self in its activity as spiritual discernment or cognition; objectively considered it is the first manifestation of the Breath of Life, the Universal Consciousness, and in man his highest principle; hence it is synonymous with the Higher Self or Soul-Mind. It is no other than the Hidden and Supreme Logos, the first Creator in a Kosmos, the cause of all things. He is the "First-Born" of whom the Puranas tell us that "Earth and Mahat are the inner and outer boundaries of the Universe (the Kosmos or Solar System), or, in our own terms: the negative and positive poles of dual Nature (abstract and concrete). 
"In my Father's house are many mansions", may be contrasted with the Occult saying; "In our Mother's House are Seven Mansions", or Planes, the lowest of which is above and around us in the formless form of the Astral Light. (Do not confuse Astral Light with Aether or Primordial Substance). 
Whatsoever quits the dormant state of Chaos becomes active life; it is drawn into the vortex of Motion (which is the true Alchemical Solvent of Life); Spirit and Matter are the two states of the One, which is neither Spirit nor Matter, both being the Absolute Life Spirit is the first differentiation of (and in) Space and Matter is the first latent. 
differentiation of Spirit. That which is neither Spirit nor Matter, that is IT- the causeless CAUSE of Spirit and Matter, which are the cause of the Cosmos. And THAT we call the ONE LIFE, or the Intra-Cosmic Breath, as the old Teaching states. 
This lecture completes the First Step in Grade 3. If there is anything you wish to write about we shall be glad to hear from you as usual. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
