SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 5. 

Dear Disciple, 
The Ancient Teachings tell us that, in order to become a divine, fully conscious God, even the highest the Spiritual Primeval Intelligences must pass through the human stage. And this does not only apply to our terrestrial humanity, but to the mortals that inhabit any world, i.e., to those Intelligences that have reached the appropriate equilibrium between Matter and Spirit. Each Entity must have won for itself the right of becoming divine.....through self-experience. Therefore the Hierarchy of 'Flames', of the 'Sons of Fire', and all the rest of the great Intelligences in the Astral Worlds were once men. Those 'Sons of Fire' are the first great Beings in a new Kosmos, and they are called 'Minds', evolved from Primordial Fire. In other words they are 'clothed' with that Substance, which is at the same time the Essence of their being. When it is said that these great Spirits are 'Born', the meaning is that they 'appear'. They have evolved during uncountable aeons of "Time', until they have reached their present state of perfection. 
'Fire' is Aether in its purest form; but there are two 'Fires', and a distinction is made between them in Occult Science. The first, or purely formless and invisible Fire (formless and invisible to us), concealed in the Central Spiritual Sun, is spoken of as Triple (metaphysically); while the Fire of the Manifested Kosmos is Septenary, throughout both the Universe and our Solar System. "The Fire of knowledge burns up all action on the plane of Illusion", says the Ancient Teaching. "Therefore those who have acquired it and are emancipated, are called 'Fires". 
Most of the Western Christian Kabalists - pre-eminently Eliphas Levi - in their desire to reconcile the Occult Sciences with Church dogmas, did their best to make of the Astral Light the Pleroma of the early Church Fathers, the abode of the Host of the Fallen Angels, of the Archons and Powers. But the Astral Light, though only the lower aspect of the Absolute, is still dual. It is the Anima Mundi, the World Soul, and ought never to be viewed otherwise, except for Kabalistic purposes. The difference which exists between its 'Light' and its 'Living Fire', ought ever to be present in the mind of the Seer and the psychic. The higher aspect of this Light, without which only creatures of matter can be produced, is the Living Fire, and its Seventh Principle. The Astral Light is dual and bisexual, the (ideal) male part of it is purely divine and spiritual, it is Wisdom; while the female portion of it (the Spiritus of the Nazarenes) is tainted with Matter in one sense; and indeed it is Matter. It is the 
Source of all Worlds, which were primarily evolved from the One Element in its second stage of "Father-Mother". But this first Stage of evolution was followed in due course by the next; for no world, and no heavenly body, could be constructed on the objective plane had not the Elements been sufficiently differentiated from their primeval state. Archaic Philosophy, recognising neither good nor evil as a fundamental or independent power, but starting from the Absolute ALL (or Universal Perfection), traces both through the course of natural evolution to pure Light condensing gradually into form, and hence becoming Matter or Evil. 
Primordial Substance is called Chaos by some, but Plato and the Pythagoreans named it the Soul of the World, after it had been impregnated by the Spirit of that which broods over the Primeval Waters, or Chaos. It is by being reflected in it, say the Kabalists, that the "brooding" Principle "created' the phantasmagoria of a visible, manifested Universe. But Chaos before, Aether after this 'reflection', it is still the Deity that pervades Space and all things. Called in derision by the Marquis de Mirville, the "Nebulous Almighty", it is to this day termed by the Theurgists and Occultists the 'Living Fire'; and there is not a Hindu who practises at dawn a certain kind of meditation but knows its effects. And in this appellation of 'Living Fire' we may also discover the meaning of the puzzling sentence in the Zend Avesta which states that there is "a Fire that gives knowledge of the future, science and amiable speech"; that is to say, which develops an extraordinary eloquence in the Sybil, the sensitive, and even in some orators. 
And in connection with this you should if you wish - sit in meditation each morning at dawn (or as many mornings as you can), and, before sitting down, you should stand upright, head bowed, hands crossed over the breast and resting on the shoulders, and when the Sun's rim becomes visible over the horizon you should salute the East by saying: 
"Hail to the East, domain and Source of Wisdom; Hail to the Sons of Light and Wisdom; may their divine protecting hands be stretched over me and guide me to Good; may their divine effulgence and Love pervade all my being with right thinking and right conduct. Amen, Amen, Amen". 
Then bow three times to the East and sit down, facing the East, feeling quite comfortable and making still your Mind by the Power of Peace, so that Wisdom, Goodness and Love can flow into you and raise 
up your Higher Mind until it contacts the Source of All. You will find this exercise very beneficial in many ways, and the effort is extremely worth while. 
This "Fire" is spoken of in all the Hindu Books, as also in the Kabalistic works. The Zohar explains it as the "White Hidden Fire, in the Resha havurah" (the White Head), whose Will causes the fiery fluid to flow in 370 currents in every direction of the universe. It is identical with the "Serpent that runs with 370 leaps" of the Siphra Dtzenioutha, the Serpent, which, when the "Perfect Man" (the Metatron) is raised, that is to say, when the divine man indwells in the animal man, or the Higher Mind has subdued the lower, becomes three Spirits or Higher Mind, Soul and Spirit.....the ultimate 
perfection of man. 
That Fire is the Chaos of the Ancients; the Zoroastrian Sacred Fire, or the Atash-Behram of the Parsis; the Hermes-fire, the Elmes-fire of the ancient Germans; the lightning of Cybele; the Burning Torch of Apollo; the Flame on the altar of Pan; the Inextinguishable Fire in the Temple of the Acropolis, and in that of Vesta; the Fire-Flame of Pluto's helm; the brilliant Sparks on the caps of the Dioscuri, on the Gorgon's head, the helm of Pallas, and the staff of Mercury; the Egyptian Ptah-Ra; the Grecian Zeus Cataibates (the descending) of Pausanias; the Pentecostal Fire-tongues; the Burning Bush of Moses; the Pillar of Fire of Exodus, and the Burning Lamp of Abraham; the Eternal Fire of the "bottomless pit"; the Delphic Oracular Vapours; the Sidereal Light of the Western Occultists; the Akasha of the Hindu Adepts; the Astral Light of Eliphas Levi; the Nerve-Aura and the Fluid of the Magnetists; the Od of von Reichenbach; the Psychod and Ectenic Force of Thury; the Psychic Force of Sergeant Cox, and the atmospheric magnetism of some Naturalists; galvanism; and finally, electricity. All these are but various names for different manifestations of effects of the same mysterious, all-pervading Cause, the Greek Archaeus. 
The Authors of the Sacred Scriptures in India go deeper into the origin of evolution of things than any others, for they teach; "From Intelligence (or Mahat), associated with Ignorance (Matter), attended by its protective power, in which the quality of dullness (insensibility) predominates, proceeds Ether from ether, air; from air, heat; from heat, water; and from water, earth with everything on it". "From This, from this same Self, was the Ether produced", says the Veda (Taittiriya Upanishad 2. 1). 
The Astral Light, or lower Ether, is full of conscious, semi-conscious, and unconscious Entities. All the ancient nations Deified Aether in its imponderable aspect and potency (not the lower Ether or Astral Light). Virgil calls Jupiter Pater Omnipotens Aether, and the "Great Aether" in Georgics, Book II. 
The Hindus have also placed it among their deities, under the name of Ākāsha, the synthesis of Ether. And the author of the Homoemerian System of Philosophy, Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, firmly believed that the spiritual prototypes of all things, as well as their elements, were to be found in the boundless Aether, where they were generated, whence they evolved, and whither they returned Occult Teaching. 

It thus becomes clear that it is from Aether, in its highest synthetic aspect, once anthropomorphised, that sprang the first idea of a personal creative Deity. With the philosophical Hindus the Elements are Tamas, i.e., "unenlightened by intellect, which they obscure". 
 
There are six Hierarchies of Dhyan Chohans, synthesised by their Primary the Seventh represented by the Astral Light; the Light of Logos; this is Spirit-Matter. Beginning with the pure spiritual plane, it becomes grosser as it descends, until it becomes Illusion, or the tempting and deceitful Serpent on our Plane. Jesus accepted the Serpent as a synonym of Wisdom, and this formed part of His Teaching; "Be ye wise as Serpents". 
In the Book of Sarparajni it says; "In the beginning, before Mother became Father-Mother, the fiery Dragon moved in the Infinitudes alone”. The Aitareya Brāhmana calls the Earth Sarparājni, the 'Serpent-Queen', and the "Mother of all that moves". Before our Globe became egg-shaped a long trail of cosmic dust (fire-mist) moved and writhed like a serpent in Space. In the 'Book of Hermes', Pymander, the oldest and most spiritual of the Logoi of the Western Continent, appears to Hermes in the shape of a fiery dragon of "Light, Fire and Flame". Pymander, the “Thought Divine” personified, says; "The Light is I, I am Nous (the Mind or Manu), I am thy God, and I am far older than the human principle which escapes from the shadow (Darkness, or the concealed Deity). I am the germ of thought, the resplendent Word, the Son of God. All that thus sees and hears in thee is the "Verbum of the Master; it is thought (Mahat) which is God, the Father. The celestial Ocean, the Aether, is the Breath of the Father, the life-giving principle, the Mother, the Holy Spirit.......for these are not separated, and their union is Life". 
The 'Sea of Fire' is the Super-Astral Light, the first radiation from the Root, undifferentiated cosmic Substance, which becomes Astral Matter. If the student bears in mind that there is but One Universal Element, which is infinite, unborn, and undying, and that all the rest as in the world of phenomena are but so many various differentiated aspects and transformations, or correlations, of that One, from macrocosmical down to microcosmical effects, from superhuman down to human and subhuman beings, the totality, in short, of objective existence then the first and chief difficulty will disappear, and the Occult Cosmology may be mastered. Thus in the Egyptian, as also in the Indian Theogony there was a concealed Deity, the ONE, and further a creative, androgynous god; Shu (Shoo) being the God of Creation, and Osiris in his original primary form, the God "Whose name is unknown". 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
