SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 6. 

Dear Disciple, 
Chaos was called 'senseless' by the Ancients, because - Chaos and Space being synonymous 
it represented and contained all the Elements in their rudimentary, undifferentiated state. They made Aether, the Fifth Element, the synthesis of the other Four; but the Ether (currently rejected by modern physicists) is but one of the sub- divisions of the true Aether, that is: on our Plane. 
The existence of Spirit in the common Mediator, the Ether, is denied by Materialism; while Theology makes of it a personal God. The Kabalist, on the other hand, holds that both are wrong; saying that in Ether, the Elements represent only Matter, the blind Cosmic Forces of Nature; while Spirit represents the Intelligence which directs them; and in the Platonic language Aether and Chaos are Mind and Matter, the two primeval Principles of the Universe, completely independent of anything else. 
"The Seven Astral Rulers of the Spheres (the planetary Lords), create the Monads, or Souls, out of their own substance, endowing the Monads with a Spark of their substance which is the Divine Light". This is one of the ancient teachings; but it must be taken with the greatest caution, for the real truth lies concealed within it. You will be able to see for yourself in how far it can be taken literally, for we have already told you that the physical body, the astral body, the Spark or Life-principle, and the SOUL-MIND come from four different sources. We mention this once more in passing, in order to refresh your memory on the subject. 
The Astral Powers (or super-human Astral Spirits) are in a constant state of change, not in their identity, but revolving in circles and spirals, or in cyclic progress of constant development. And their change is ever from Illusion to Actuality, ever cyclic and upward towards Pure Spirit, in which they will be 'clothed' eventually. Meanwhile they place their impress on those humans of their own 'Ray', who progress with them, and follow in their wake. At the same time they control and regulate the Astral Elements and the Beings within them. 
All that which is, emanates from the Absolute, which, by reason of this qualification alone, stands as the One and Only Reality, or Actuality - hence, everything extraneous must be an illusion, most undeniably; even to the highest Gods, Angels and Spirits within the Astral Realms. 
There is a constant urge in everything in the Astral Worlds; an urge for Evolution, an almost Darwinian struggle for life and supremacy; and this has given rise to the great "wars in heaven" in the Puranas; and Hesiod's wars of the Titans, and so on. Northern Mythology refers to it as the battle of the Flames, which the Sons of Muspel fought on the field of Wigred. All these allegories relate to Heaven and Earth, and have a double, and often a triple meaning and esoteric application to things below. They relate to the adjustment of the Orbs as well as to the struggle for supremacy among nations and tribes. Old worlds perish and are conquered (replaced) by new ones; and the assertion that all the stars, planets etc., - as soon as a nucleus of primordial substance, in the undifferentiated state, is informed by the freed principles of a just deceased sidereal body - become first comets, then suns, to cool down to inhabitable worlds, is a teaching as old as the Rishis. 
According to the Ancient Teachings, there is at each of the cardinal points a "Winged Wheel', for the Four Holy Ones and their Armies or Hosts. These are the four Great Kings of the Devas, who preside each over a point, having each a distinct Occult property. They have their physical and material agents to carry out their decrees, and they control the Four Winds, for instance, each Wind having its own respective evil or beneficent influence upon the health of mankind and every living thing. There is Occult Philosophy in the Roman Catholic doctrine which traces the various public calamities, such as epidemics of disease, and even wars and other things, to the invisible "Messengers" from North and West. "The Glory of God comes from the way of the East", says Ezekiel; while Jeremiah, Isaiah and the Psalmist assure us that all the evil under the Sun comes from the North and West which, when applied to the Jewish nation, sounds like an undeniable prophecy. And this accounts also for St. Ambrose (On Amos, 4) declaring that it is precisely for this reason that "we curse the North Wind, and that during the ceremony of baptism we begin by turning towards the West (Siderial), to renounce the better him who inhabits it; after which we turn to the East". 
Though St. Augustine has said that every visible thing in this world had an angelic 'virtue' as an overseer near it, it is not individuals but entire species of things that must be understood; each such species having indeed its particular angel to watch it. 
Considering the Ritual of the 'Spirits of the Stars', established by the Roman Catholic Church, these look suspiciously like 'gods', but they were no more honoured or worshipped by the ancient Pagan 
rabble, than they are now by the highly cultured Catholic Christians. For the Church there are two kinds of Sidereal Beings: Angels and Devils. For the Kabalists and Occultists, there is but one Class, and neither Occultist or Kabalist makes any difference between the "Rectors of Light" and the "Rectores Tenebrarum", or Cosmocratores, whom the Roman Church imagines and discovers in the "Rectors of Light", as soon as any one of them is called by another name than the one she uses. 

The Elements of Fire, Water and Air of Occultism, or the so- called "Elements of Primary Creation", are not the compound elements that are known on Earth, but the noumenal homogeneous Elements the Spirits of those known on Earth. They follow the Septenary Groups, or Hosts. That which we recognise on Earth as an element, contains only its four lower principles. The three higher Principles of, say an Atom, can be discerned by the Seer only; just as the three higher Principles of Septenary Man can be perceived only by means of man's spiritual perceptions. 
In Esoteric Philosophy, then, every physical particle corresponds to, and depends on, its higher noumenon the Being to whose Essence it belongs; and, above as below, the Spiritual evolves from the Divine, the psycho-mental from the Spiritual - tainted from its lower plane by the Astral - the whole animate and (seemingly) inanimate Nature evolving on parallel lines, and drawing its attributes from above as well as from below!! Here then is a teaching which shows you the thread that runs from the Highest to the lowest, and back again, holding the whole of the Universe of Spirit and Matter bound in an unbreakable connection. 
You will thus perceive at once the nature of the Beings in the Astral Worlds as being the higher portions of all things on Earth, while at the same time these Astral Entities are the lower portions of the Divine and Higher Spiritual Realms. Therefore you will also recognise that although Realms or Planes 2, 3 and 4 are higher than Realm 1 - the Earth- they cannot be called Divine Realms, although the nearest to the Divine Realms (with the Spiritual Ones intervening) is Realm Four, the Realm of the Sun. But even the Realms or Planes numbers 5, 6 and 7, beyond the Material Planes cannot be called 'Divine', though Spiritual. The truly Divine lies beyond the Seventh Plane. 
This is why in Book 1 of the Vishnu Purana, it is taught that in connection with the Septenary Host, or rather seven Groups of Hosts, 
the highest Group, consisting of the Asuras born in Brahma's first body, which turned into 'Night', are divided like the Pitris into seven classes, three of which are 'bodiless' (Pure Spirit), and four with bodies (lower Astral or Material). These are in reality more truly our Ancestors than the Pitris, who projected the first physical man. We want you to remember that word 'projection' in connection with the creation of man. 
In connection with the forces awakened into activity on the Higher Astral Planes, it is a law of Occult dynamics that a given amount of energy expended on the Spiritual Planes is productive of far greater results than the same amount expended on the Astral Planes, and the same applies to Planes 2, 3 and 4 when compared with the Earth Plane. But when a man has, by means of meditation and proper attunement, raised his consciousness to any of the Higher Planes, he will produce greater results accordingly, and his power in any direction will be in proportion to the powers he has linked up with. 
Philo teaches that: "The air is full of (Souls), and that those which are nearest the Earth, descending to be tied to mortal bodies, return back to bodies, being desirous to live in them. This shows that the Essenes believed in re-birth and re-incarnation on Earth. The reason why these 'Souls' wish to return to human bodies is that through, and in, the human forms they will become progressive Beings, whereas the nature of the 'Angel' (who has never been in a human body) is intransitive; therefore Man has in him the potency of transcending the faculties of the Angels. Hence the Initiates in India say that it is the Brahman, the twice-born, who rules the Gods or Devas; and Paul says for the same reason in his 'Epistle to the Corinthians': "Know ye not that we (the Initiates) shall judge angels?” 
The Zohar teaches: "The Soul and the Form (Higher Mind and Astral Body in other words) when descending on Earth put on an earthly garment". Reference is here made to the fact that the Astral Body is not formed of the same material as our earthly bodies. It teaches further that: "When Adam dwelled in the Garden of Eden, he was dressed in the celestial garment, which is the garment (or body) of heavenly light.....light of that light which was used in the Garden of Eden. Man (The Heavenly Adam) was created by the Sephirod of the Jetziratic World, and by their common power the Seven Angels of a still lower World engendered the Earthly Adam". 
Now you should compare all that we have told you thus far in this Lecture with the previous five of this Grade, and you will note how we 
have led up gradually to what in reality is a great revelation. Had we baldly given you the last few paragraphs it might have meant next to nothing to some of our students, but by slowly preparing the ground and carefully planting the seed, the flower of knowledge has now opened its buds, perfuming the garden of your thoughts and perceptions; and not only will one single bloom open out its petals to you, giving delight, but, as we proceed, blossom after blossom will spread its beauty before you, until the real Garden of Eden lies revealed in all its Glory. 
When we tell you that the 'Progenitors' created Man out of their Astral Bodies of Light, we simply revive a once universal belief. Light itself cannot cast any shadow, and in the East the Devas (or Angels) are credited with having no shadows of their own. And when a ‘spirit', or a Deva, does not cast a shadow, this is a sure sign of a good and holy Spirit to the Seer who beholds it; and this applies to all Beings without human, earthly, bodies. 
Stobaeus, who was a Greek compiler of ancient fragments and lived in the fifth century A.D., gives the following transcription of an old Hermetic fragment, showing the ancient Egyptian theory of the progress of the lower and Higher Mind: "From One Soul, that of ALL, spring all the souls, which spread themselves as if purposely distributed through the world. These souls undergo many transformations; those which are already creeping creatures turn into aquatic animals; from these aquatic animals are derived land animals; and from the latter the birds. From the beings who live aloft in the air (heaven) men are born. On reaching that status of men, the souls receive the principle of (conscious) immortality (Higher Mind, in other words), become spirits, then pass into the choir of gods." 
Here is an answer to those who accuse the ancient Egyptians (from whom sprang Moses) of crass idolatry and zoolatry. Here is also an answer to the boasters of modern Science, whose ideas on the origin of life - as we have shown you previously - are certainly not one whit in advance of the teaching contained in that little fragment of Hermes; and, moreover, this 'fragment' is of much greater age than can be imagined; 'Hermes' being a 'title' more than anything else, although based on the real name of a once living divine Sage, whose original Wisdom Teachings have been partly lost and partly mistranslated and misunderstood, although the genuine parts that are still preserved are far superior to anything else we know in Religion, Philosophy and Science of subsequent periods. And, incidentally, you may now have even a better idea of how much secret lore is locked up in such sacred 
Books as the Old and New Testaments; for that 'simple' saying of St. Paul's, quoted above, could not have been understood by us at all if we had commenced with it two years ago, provided that our understanding was, at that time, of the same grade as that of the rest of humanity, the majority of which does not give such utterances a second thought.....or would come to the right inner meaning of it by mere unguided thinking. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
