SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 3. 

Dear Disciple, 
You will have noted in our last lecture that we have referred to Astral Man, and that we have included Earth among the Astral Planes or Realms. You will see later on that the Earth Plane itself is more 'Astral' even than any of the Planes beyond it: for it is less real. 
The higher the Plane, the nearer to God.....which means the nearer to Truth. When the term 'Astral' is used it generally denotes a condition, state or Realm of which, the 'World' knows very little. In fact it refers to the 'higher' worlds which were once believed to lie beyond the 'Starry Vault' of the sky. Even today there are many good people who point upwards when referring to 'Heaven'. But in truth there is no such thing as 'direction' when we consider other realms or planes of Being or non-Being. We cannot say that the Second Plane 'above' the Earth is high up in space, for very obvious reasons; for the Earth is a globe and thus the above of the Northern Hemisphere is the below of the Southern. We cannot say either that the Astral world is within, as nearly every Occultist or Mystic states with the greatest confidence, based on ignorance. Just exactly where these Astral Realms, Planes, States of Consciousness, etc., are, will be developed in good time in our studies. The only thing we can do at present is not to bother too much about it, and accept the fact that there are Seven Higher Planes, of which the Earth is the lowest. And Earth being one of these Seven Planes, it must be classified as belonging to that Septenary concept of States of Consciousness and Being; so that if in future we speak of Earth and Man as being 'Astral', you will know that we only use the term for convenience, and not in error. 
In Central Asia there is a belief that the 'King of the World' lives within the Earth. He is supposed to be a holy man who disappeared with a whole tribe of people into the bowels of the Earth some 60,000 years ago. His kingdom is called Agharti, and it extends throughout the subterranean passages of the whole world, according to this belief. It is also believed that in that realm are now the descendants of the peoples of Atlantis and Lemuria. The Holy Pandits send sometimes their most learned men among them by means of hypnosis; in other words by projection. When they are in that state they also project to every land on earth, penetrate the depths of all the oceans, and learn every secret. The King of the World himself is in contact with all the men who influence humankind in any way, and he knows all the plans of every ruler in the outside world. If these plans are 'pleasing to God' he aids the rulers by invisible means; if not pleasing he brings them to destruction. They have one saying in Tibet which is as follows: "The King of the World will 
appear before all people when the time shall have arrived for him to lead all the good people against all the bad; but this time has not yet come. The most evil among mankind have not yet been born". This is of course the old idea of the great Messiah who will one day deliver the world from all evil. We have quoted this myth here because it contains many things you will be able to interpret by means of meditation. It is a special exercise for you. 
Men are but the distorted reflections of their Astral Doubles. The outward covering of flesh is temporary in more senses than one. The inner part of man, that which is sometimes called his 'Monad', or Entity, has existed on Earth from the very beginnings of this 'Round', and in each 'Race' or type. Up to and including our Fifth Race, the present one, the external shapes which covered those Astral Monads have changed and consolidated with every Race and sub-race; the form and physical structure of the fauna changing at the same time, as they too had to be adapted to the ever-changing conditions of life on this Globe, during the so-called 'Geological' periods of its formative cycle. And thus Man will go on changing with every Root-Race, and every Chief sub-race, down to the last one of the Seventh and final Round. What will Man look like towards the end of this Manvantara as far as his physical body is concerned? We do not know, and it is entirely useless to speculate on the subject. It is all in the hands of the Creators. 
In the beginning, the inner, and now concealed man, was then the external man. The progeny of the Dhyanis, or Pitris, or whatever else you like to call them, he was "the son like unto his father", as the ancient teachings say. "Like the lotus, whose external shape assumes gradually the form of the model within itself, so did the form of man in the beginning evolve from within without. After the cycle in which man began to procreate his species after the fashion of the present animal kingdom, it became the reverse. The human foetus follows now in its transformations all the forms that the physical frame of man assumed, throughout the three Kalpas (Rounds), during the tentative efforts at plastic formation around the Monad, by senseless, because imperfect, matter, in her blind wanderings. In the present age, the physical embryo is a plant, a reptile, and animal, before it finally becomes man". So state the very ancient teachings. Thus the Astral counterpart became entangled in the meshes of matter. 
Man, philosophically speaking, is, in his outward form simply an animal, hardly more perfect than his pithecoid-like ancestor of the Third Round. He is a living body, not a living Being, since the realisation of his existence, the “Ego Sum”, necessitates self-consciousness, and an animal can only have direct consciousness, or instinct. This was so well understood by the ancients, that even the Kabalists made of Soul and Body two Lives, independent of each other. They held that, functionally, Spirit and Matter, of corresponding opacity and density, tended to coal- esce; and that the resultant created 'Spirits', in the disembodied state, were constituted on a scale in which the differing opacities and trans- parencies of elemental uncreated spirit were reproduced. And that these spirits, in the disembodied state, attracted, appropriated, digested and assimilated elemental spirit and elemental matter whose condition was conformed to their own. They therefore taught that there was a wide difference in the conditions of created spirits; and that, in the intimate association between the Spirit World and the World of Matter, the more opaque spirits, in the disembodied state, were drawn towards the more dense parts of the material world, and therefore tended towards the centre of the Earth, where they found the conditions most suited to their state; while the more transparent Spirits passed into the surrounding aura of the planet, the most rarefied finding their home in its satellite. We find the whole of the doctrine represented in the myth of the 'King of the World', at the commencement of this lecture, and in the teachings of the Lunar Ancestors and the Path of the Moon. In this, again, you will find a partial explanation of the differences that exist among men. But the whole Truth is not represented by these teachings, as you will see later on. 
Theosophy says that this relates exclusively to our Elemental Spirits, and has naught to do with either Planetary, Sidereal, Cosmic or Inter-Etheric Intelligent Forces, or "Angels", as they are termed by the Roman Church. But this is also only a part of the Truth, and should not be considered as stating all the facts. All these dogmas, and doctrines, cover only a small portion of Esoteric Science. 
It is also believed that the Higher Mind can free itself from the human body and depart hence, while the body is still alive and functioning in the animal way; and those who believe this is possible presume that this happens in the case of insanity, "spiritual" (?) and physical depravity, and so on. But we, who have learned that the Higher Mind ever dwells within the Astral Body, together with the Life-Principle, which animates the human body at the same time, and that the Astral Body can only leave the physical body at 'death', know that this is impossible. The whole theory is a mere fancy, due to the ignorance of the real facts connected with the Septenary Astral Principles of Man, the scale of which we gave you at the end of the last lecture. In the case of insanity the Higher Mind, although present, has completely lost control of the body and lower mind, due to some mechanical defect; just the same as an engineer in charge of a dynamo, or the driver of a motor car, cannot control or drive their mechanisms if there is any defect in them which prevents them from doing so. When we listen to the mutterings or ravings of a maniac we only hear the senseless voice of the lower mind, raging against the defective physical machine, helpless, bewildered, and full of incompetent wrath. The Higher Mind is in abeyance until the machine is repaired, and it has to wait, more or less detached but not separated from the body, the same as happens when a person is under an anaesthetic, and the Higher Mind is only 'away' in the sense that it is away when it 'projects’. 
The Septenary principles of Rounds, Planets and men are very similar, and there is a perfect analogy between all the processes of Nature in the Kosmos and in the individual man. The latter lives through his life-cycle, and dies. His Higher Principles, corresponding in the development of a Planetary Chain to the cycling 'Monads', pass into a different Realm, which corresponds to the Pralaya period of rest intervening between two Chains or those of a Globe. The man's lower principles are disintegrated in the manner we told you, and are used again for the formation of new human forms; the same process takes place in the case of Globes, Planets and Chains. This is one of the "Seven Mysteries of the Moon", and is now revealed to you. 
The seven "Mysteries" are called by the Japanese Yama-booshis, who are the mystics of the Lao Tze sect and the ascetic monks of Kioto, the Dzenodoo the "Seven Jewels"; only, the Japanese and the Chinese Buddhist ascetics and Initiates are, if possible, even more reti- cent in giving out their "Knowledge" than are their Hindu Brothers. 
The Monadic Host may be roughly divided into three great Classes: 
(1) The most developed Monads - the Lunar Gods or "Spirits", called, in India, the Pitris, whose function it is to pass in the First Round through the whole triple cycle of the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms, in their most ethereal, filmy and rudimentary forms, in order to ‘clothe’ themselves in, and assimilate, the nature of the newly formed Chain. They are those who first reach the human form if there can be any form in the realm of the almost subjective on Globe A in the First Round. It is they, therefore, who lead and represent the human element during the Second and Third Rounds, and finally evolve their 'Shadows' at the beginning of the Fourth Round, for those who follow after them. 
(2) 
Those Monads that are the first to reach the human stage during the three and a half Rounds, and become "men". 
(3) 
The laggards, the Monads which are retarded, and which will not reach, by reason of inherent impediments the human stage at all during this Cycle, or Round, save one exception which will be discussed later. 

When we use the term "men", it stands to reason that these "men" did not resemble the men of today, either in form or nature. Why then, you may ask, call them "men" at all? Because we know of no other term in any Western language which approximately conveys the idea intended. The word "men" at least indicates that these beings were "manus", thinking entities, however they differed in form and intellect from ourselves. But in reality they were, in respect of spirituality and intellect rather "gods" than "men". 
The same difficulty of language is met with in describing the "stages" through which the Monad passes. Metaphysically speaking, it is of course an absurdity to talk of the "development of a Monad", or to say it becomes "man". It stands to reason that a Monad cannot either progress or develop, or even be affected in itself by the changes of state it passes through. The Monad of the Soul and Higher Mind (one Entity) is not of this world or Plane, and may only be compared to an indestructible star of divine light and fire, sent to our Earth to bring a message of Salvation, blazing within certain Personalities, and shedding rays of enlightenment upon the world of those who have lagged behind in their Monadic Evolution so many millions of years ago, and who make up the great mass of humanity at all times. It is for the latter to follow the sacred call of those "Lights", and thus by partaking of their nature to obtain freedom. For if these lower evolved Monads are left to themselves, they will cling to nothing, but drift helplessly from incarnation to incarnation, never making any progress at all. 
The evolution of the external form, or body, during earthly "life", is produced by the terrestrial forces, just as in the case of the lower kingdoms; but the evolution of the internal or real man is purely spiritual. Once that spiritual re-awakening of the Higher Mind commences, it does not merely pass through a number of human forms, at best endowed with animal instinct and consciousness, but in self-conscious perception as opposed to mere apperception. 
With best wishes, 
Yours Hidden Master. 
