SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 2. 

Dear Disciple, 
The Astral Light, called LUX esoterically, is that Primordial Substance which is the body of the great Spirits, and is directed by the Chief of Souls, called Egregores, the spirits of energy and action, and their very Essence. Our physical light is a manifestation of it on our Plane and the three Planes above it, a reflected radiance of the Astral Light, which in its turn again emanates from the collective body of those who are called the 'Lights' and the 'Flames'. As it is stated in one of the ancient Books: “It is through and from the radiation of the seven Bodies of the seven Orders of Dhyanis (Archangels), that the Seven Discrete Quantities (the Elements), whose Motion and harmonious Union produce the manifested Universe of Matter, are born. 

In the above statement you have the whole Secret of the building of a Kosmos in a nutshell. But this is not sufficient for our purpose; we must also learn to understand the details. 
These Seven Elements are developed in what are called 'Rounds' in the ancient Aryan Teachings. A Round is the great 'Life-Wave' from the Source of all Being, vivifying successively the seven globes that constitute a 'Planetary Chain'. As this Creative Energy passes on from one Planet to another, so does each former Planet go into what is called 'Pralaya', and the next Planet awakens, and its latent activities begin to manifest. Seven Rounds constitute a Manvantara. The complete evolution of our Solar System comprises Seven Planetary Chains successively brought forth, each Chain being, as it were, a reincarnation of the preceding one. Three of these Chains belong to the past; the Fourth is the present one, the Terrene, that of which the Earth forms the Fourth Globe; the remaining three Planetary Chains have yet to appear. A Pralaya is the period of life of a world, chain or solar system when that life is partially or wholly indrawn, activity or manifestation ceasing in part or in whole. The Pralaya of a Planet the 'winter' between the Rounds of a Life-Wave - is known as a Minor Pralaya; the Pralaya of a Solar System is known as a Maha-Pralaya; and the Pralaya of a Universe as a Cosmic Pralaya. During the Minor Pralayas, the Planets remain intact, though completely dormant (see diagram in Lecture No.6 of Grade 2). 
During the First Round, we are taught, only One Element is developed and it might be compared to 'one-dimensional' Space. The First Element was Fire. In the Second Round Fire and Air are the two Elements, and the beings of that period are two-dimensional. The Element of the Third Round is Water, added to the previous two, and in 
the Fourth Round Earth was and is the next Element. 
The ancient Teachings state: "The Globe was fiery, cool and radiant, as were its ethereal men and animals during the First Round; luminous and more dense and heavy during the Second Round; watery during the Third". Milton enumerated the order of the Elements correctly when he spoke of the "Powers of Fire, Air, Water, Earth"; and the Earth, such as we know it now, had no existence before the Fourth Round, hundreds of millions of years ago. This is in direct contradiction to the data furnished by the Geologists, but it is correct, nevertheless. Émile Blanchard (1819-1900), in his 'Origin of Life', shows some strange contradictions and confusions in the theories of his colleagues, and if you can ever obtain a copy of this book it will be well worth reading. It is quite possible that the 'Fire' of the First Element of the First Round was the pure Primordial Substance, the first matter of the 'Magnum Opus' of the Creators and Builders, the Astral Light; the 'Water' of the Second Round that primordial Fluid which was required, according to Moses, to make 'a living soul'; 'Air', simply Nitrogen, the 'Breath of the Supporters of the Heavenly Dome', as the Mohammedan Mystics call it; and 'Earth' is Man. 
The Fourth Round transformed the gaseous fluids and plastic form of our Globe into the hard, crusted, grossly material sphere on which we are now living. The Earth will reach her true ultimate form only towards the end of the Manvantara, at the end of the Seventh Round. 

You know that there are Seven Divine Planes of Being, of which Earth is the lowest, and the number seven is the most important number of all. All the ancient teachings are full of this number. If we consider the First Astral Element, Fire, which in future we shall call by its proper name Fohat in order to distinguish it from fire as we know it on Earth, we shall then find that Fohat is the key which opens the door of the Chamber of Occultism in which all the riddles, multiform symbols and allegories in the so-called Mythology of all the ancient Nations are stored; demonstrating, for instance, the wonderful Philosophy and the deep insight into the mysteries of Nature, contained in the Egyptian and Chaldean, as well as in the Aryan religious Systems. Fohat, shown in its true character, shows how deeply versed were all the prehistoric Nations in every Science of Nature, now called the physical and chemical branches of Natural Philosophy. In India, Fohat is the scientific aspect of both Vishnu and Indra, the latter older and more important in the Rig Veda than his sectarian successor; while in Egypt, Fohat was known as Toom (or Temu) issued of Noot (or Nut), or Osiris in his character of a primordial God. In the Egyptian 'Book of the Dead' appears the following; "O Toom, Toom! issued from the great (female) which is in the bosom of the waters (the great Deep, or Space), luminous through the two Lions". The "two Lions", is the dual Force, or power of the two Solar Eyes, or the electro-positive and the electro-negative forces. Toom is spoken of as the Protean God who generates other Gods and gives himself the form he likes; the "Master of Life, giving their vigour to the Gods", which are the Astral Powers and Intelligences, He is the overseer of the Gods, and he "who creates spirits of the West"; and finally the "Setting Sun of Life", or the vital electric force that leaves the body at death to dwell in the Astral Body henceforth; wherefore the Defunct begs that Toom should give him the breath from his right nostril (positive electricity) that he might live in his second form (the Astral Body). Both the hieroglyph and the text in the Book of the Dead, show the identity of Toom and Fohat. The former represents a man standing erect with the hieroglyph of the breaths in his hands, and the latter says; "I open to the Chief of Anu (Heliopolis, or On). I am Toom. I cross the water spilt by Thoth-Hapi, the Lord of the Horizon, and am the divider of the Earth (Fohat divides Space and, with his Sons, the Earth into seven Zones) I cross the Heavens; I am the two Lions. I am Ra, I am Aam, I eat my heir. (An image expressing the succession of divine functions, the transmutation of one form into another, or the correlation of forces. Aam is the electro-positive force, devouring all others, as Saturn devoured his progeny)......I glide on the soil of the field of Aanroo, given me by the Master of Limitless Eternity. I am Toom, to whom eternity is accorded". 
Aanroo is in the domain of Osiris, a field divided into fourteen sections, "surrounded with an iron impenetrable enclosure", within which grows "the corn of Life, seven cubits high", the Astral region where the desires carried through from earth-life are expended, and the Higher Mind becomes able to respond to purely mental vibrations; the Hades of the Greeks; the Limbo of the Scholastics. Those only of the dead, who know the names of the Janitors of the "seven halls", will be admitted into 'Amenti' (or Heaven) for ever; i.e., those who have passed through the Seven Races of each Round otherwise they will rest in the lower fields (or Planes two and three); and Aanroo represents also the seven successive heaven-worlds, or states, in which the Soul-Mind exists when it has transcended the Astral Body. In the highest conception of Amenti (similar to the Devachan of the Theosophists—the Shining Land, or the Land of the Gods), one becomes pure spirit for eternity; while in Aanroo the "soul of the spirit" (or Higher Mind), or the Defunct, is devoured each time by Uraeus the Serpent, Son of the Earth, (which 'Serpent' in one sense 
represents the primordial vital principles in the Sun). In other words, the Astral Body of the deceased is reincarnated again; and it also means that the remains of the lower mind, or body, its 'Elementary', fades out and disappears in the "Son of the Earth", or in limited time. 
In the Egyptian papyri and in the Book of the Dead, the whole cosmogony of the Aryans can be found, scattered about in isolated sentences. "The Great Water" (the Deep, or Chaos) is said to be “seven cubits deep"- "cubits" standing here of course for divisions, zones, principles etc. Therein, "in the Great Mother all the Gods, and the Seven Great Ones are born". (The Seven Great Ones are the Seven Planetary Logoi; and the Gods are all the rest of the great beings who dwell in the Astral Realms). Both Fohat and Toom are addressed as the "Great Ones of the Seven Magic Forces", who "conquer the Serpent Apap," or Matter. 
Eliphas Levi called the number seven "the key to the Mosaic creation and the symbols of every religion". He shows the Kabalah faithfully following even the septenary division of man, for the diagram he gives in his 'Key to the Great Mysteries' (La Clef des Grands Mystères, 1861) is septenary. Thus we find the two symbols of the square and the triangle, the square occupying the lower position and the triangle with the point upwards above it. Only in this instance the 'square' is in the form of a triangle with its point downwards and a dot in the centre of it, thus preserving the four corners of the square in a hidden manner. The meaning of this double symbol is as follows. At the apex of the upper triangle we find "pure spirit", Astral Plane number seven; number six (on the left as you face the diagram) is Soul; number five is Higher Mind. The top left hand corner of the lower triangle (the hidden square) represents the Life, or Sun Principle (the Spark); strangely enough this has the number three, which is wrong; it should be four, corresponding to the Fourth Plane; the right hand corner is number four in this case (should be three), and this is the seat of the animal passions; number two represents the Astral Body and is placed in the centre of the lower triangle; number one is the physical body or the lower mind at the lowest point of the lower triangle. There are a number of further explanations, but they do not matter here. 
The correct ascending scale of man's seven principles, from the lowest and earthly to the highest and divine, is as follows: 
1. Septenary physical body, or animal body of man. This is disintegrated at 'death' and returns to earth; its atoms being liberated and re-distributed in matter. 
2. The Septenary Lower Mind principle of the physical body. 
That animal consciousness which directs all the functions of the body and is one with it during physical life. This too is disintegrated at death, and its atoms rejoin the matter of the Astral Planes numbers Two or Three 
or those of the lower planes, or lower Astral Realms. 
3. The Astral Body. An eternal vehicle which eventually becomes more and more etherealised as it ascends to the Higher Realms, in accordance with the progress of the Higher Mind or its Evolution. 
4. The Spark of Life within the Astral Body. This remains with the Astral Body as its animating principle until the Divine Entity ascends beyond the Fourth Plane; for it is a Sun Principle, and is left behind in the Realm of the Sun - which is the Fourth Plane - to be replaced by a higher Life Principle, animating the completely spiritualised Astral Body in the three Highest Planes. 
5. The Higher Mind, or negative part of the Soul. 
6. The Positive Soul. 
7. The Soul-Mind and Divine Spirit. A re-union of the positive and negative Principles of Soul and Higher Mind, AFTER ascending from Plane Four. No re-incarnation on Earth is possible after this. The Divine Spirit then takes the place of the Spark, and the three are ONE — a Divine Trinity. 
You should make a really deep study of this lecture, for it is most important in every way. There is no other Order in the world that can give you the details of septenary Astral Man, as given at the end of this Lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
