SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 1. 

Dear Disciple, 

Once again it is our great pleasure to welcome you upon your entrance into a higher Grade; let us hope that you will find this Third Grade even more interesting than the previous ones. There are certainly a number of most important things to discuss, and a good few interesting new exercises to be added to those which you have had already, and, as practically every student has made great strides in many directions, we can now present to you several little experiments which you could not have conducted before you mastered those of Grades 1 and 2. But before we commence these studies and exercises there is something else we wish to say. We have received even more letters of appreciation this time than at the end of Grade 1; and, moreover, several of those who could afford it have given concrete and substantial further proofs of their appreciation by helping on the work with some excellent donations to the funds of the Order. For this we ask you to accept our very sincere thanks; principally because it will enable us to help some students who are not so affluent as others to carry on with their studies. There is no greater credit possible to any man or woman than to aid sincere seekers to find the path that leads to the Great Light. And you all know that we are not boasting when we simply state that by means of our studies and exercises it is possible to find that Path. For this reason we have kept our fees as low as possible and we can assure you we would make no charge at all, if it were at all feasible. But this cannot be done, as we - your Masters - are Mystics and Occultists, and not business people, and as such we have little interest in worldly goods, which, after all, are merely material things and of no consequence when compared with the Riches of the Spirit. Therefore we do not claim that we are so rich that we can give away our Teachings to all and sundry free of charge. Let this suffice for the time being, and please be assured that we are grateful for any donations and thank you on behalf of all those students who will benefit by your goodwill and generosity. 
Before we take up the study of the Inhabitants of the Astral Worlds it will be necessary in this Lecture to talk to you briefly about the Atom and the Electron, and what happens to an electron after it has been subjected to a 'bombardment' by Alpha, Beta and Gamma Rays and particles, as discussed in the very early part of Grade 1. Very few students indeed have ever asked us about this, though many must have thought about it. In the course of our studies all such points are eventually cleared up in any case, but it is not wise to discuss a question from all points the moment it is introduced, for then the early work would become so complicated that it might confuse instead of 
enlighten; and this we always try to avoid by unfolding the teachings very gradually. 
Modern physicists have now compiled a formidable list of subatomic particles resulting from experiments of this nature; but their intricate system of classification will not provide a clear answer to this question. We will therefore ignore their obfuscations (for the time being), and concentrate on the simple facts. 
You know that an atom is a Solar or Kosmic System in itself. Size does not enter into the argument at all; for to a being on an electron the nucleus or Sun of the Atom looks as large as our Sun seems to be, and just as far away. His 'earth' or globe is to him as large as our own earth, and the 'planets' in the Atom move according to the same Laws as our Planets: always provided that the beings on an electron can see their Solar System in the same way we do. 
There have been and are, a number of clairvoyants and well- know ones too, such as Mr. Geoffrey Hodson, who wrote an interesting series of books on Fairies, Devas, Angels and so on who have succeeded in projecting their consciousness into atoms, and have beheld there the wonders of these tiny cosmoses — that is to say — tiny to our ordinary perceptions.....for an atom is so small that no one has ever seen it by means of material sight such as we humans have. When atoms have been photographed, as described in Grade 1, and a small point of light appeared on the photographic plates, these specks of light are not the atoms, but their magnetic fields surrounding them, or the colossal glow of the atom blazing up in fierce combustion after the bombardment (*see end note); just as at times far distant stars or planets in our Universe suddenly blaze up, due to a collision or for some other reason, to die out again after shorter or longer periods. What these clairvoyants saw was just what we see when we look up to the sky. In the daytime a great Sun, when there are no clouds, and at night the planets or the other electrons etc., in the atomic heavens. They do not see a multitude of stars, such as we behold at night, when the atom is entirely separated from all other atoms; which is of course very rare. But when great multitudes of atoms are clustered together, which is usual, then their sky picture is of a similar nature to what we see ourselves from our Earth; for our Universe is nothing more nor less than a cluster of great atoms in the form of uncountable Solar Systems around the Hidden Central Sun. Science has a realisation of all this, yet it cannot explain the mystery, for it works on a material basis only, and, moreover, it is tied fast to three-dimensional Space; in spite of the various theories about fourth, fifth and sixth dimensions. 

Some scientists, such as Ouspensky, in 'A New Model of the Universe', thought that "Every separate thing and every separate phenomenon, in becoming bigger or smaller, ceases to be what it was and becomes something else something belonging to another category". But if we apply this to atoms and cosmoses, or to planets and electrons, we must realise that although an electron seems to be smaller (to our perceptions) than our Earth, for example, then in accordance with the unalterable laws they do not change into something else but remain just what they are: electrons and planets, atoms and cosmoses. Size makes no difference to objects when compared with other objects, whether we can see them or not. We know very well that there are a number of loop-holes to the above quoted statement, and that it can be explained in many ways, but such statements have no value in reality for they mislead many people into thinking the opposite of what may be intended; just as the ancient Teachers used to hide their real meanings behind allegories. This may be all very well for the world in general, but we cannot pass such things when we address our students, and it is our duty to make them clear. When, for example, the fourth, fifth and sixth dimensions are considered to be time dimensions: there again we are still in three dimensions only; for time is but the reverse of Space!! 
Science's ideas about Motion, Vibrations, Undulatory and Spiral Movements, and so on, are completely wrong, as we stated in our discussions on Motion etc., in Grade 2. All these erroneous conceptions prevent Science from having a true and accurate understanding of the atomic cosmoses. Now when an electron is 'ejected' from an atom by 'bombardments', one of several things may happen. It may be smashed into small fragments, similar in nature to what we term meteors, etc. it may be turned into a gas, or gases, which will spread out into all Space; it may turn into an incandescent body of the same nature as a comet, following a huge new orbit around the old nucleus or sun, and soaring in and out of its atomic solar system, just as we see our comets do; and finally it may disappear into Space altogether and disintegrate slowly during its travels, appearing into and vanishing out of various other atomic heavens like a wandering comet; these roamers that visit our Solar System sometimes, no one knowing whence they come nor whither they are bound. 
When we discuss the 'Astral Worlds and their Inhabitants', you should remember that the same conditions apply, though the effects may and do vary, in all the Astral Regions around every Planet in the Universe; no matter if such Planets are a million times larger than our Earth or a quintillion times smaller, or are even of the same size as the Atom. 
When Ouspensky stated that "Atomic and electronic matter can with every right be regarded as matter belonging not to our, but to another space, for it requires for its description six dimensions. And its units, molecules, atoms and electrons, if taken by themselves, can with every right be called immaterial", then he was on the wrong track, as you now will be able to understand. The fact that our senses cannot perceive an atom in the ordinary way, i.e. by ordinary sight, whether reinforced by a microscope or not, does not make it immaterial. The same applies to the Astral Worlds; because we cannot perceive them by means of ordinary sight, whether reinforced by a microscope, a telescope, or any other material means, does not make them immaterial either! No!! They are very much material in every sense. They are the domains of the invisible atom, the electron, and their various sub-divisions. And they are more than that, for in addition to these material objects there too is Spirit on a higher rate of vibration than the Spirit which manifests on our Earth within every material thing or being. In these Astral Realms (we do not like the term 'Astral' at all, but it must serve for the time being) there are, as you were told by our Grand Master in the last Lecture of Grade 2, the Architects, Builders and their 'workmen', and hosts of other forces, conditions, principles, laws and so on; each of whom or which has his or its appointed task to fulfil. There is the Aether, which is now thrown overboard once more by Science, because it does not understand it and does not know what to do with it and what it does; the Aether, that great connecting Principle which makes possible the many correlations between both Spirit and Matter, and between each of them separately. There are the great Forces of Light, of Fire, of Electricity; all manipulated by those hosts of workers without any Unions, wages, overtime, holidays etc., workers who never go on strike, for if they did or could — which they cannot, being bound by the great Laws and the Intelligences under God - the whole System of our Kosmos and the Universe would collapse. And though all these mundane things just mentioned do not apply there, every one is happy and content in his or its own particular sphere because each does the job he or it is best fitted for, and there are no square pegs in round holes, and round pegs in square holes. This has all the Ideal States, Utopias and such doctrines such as Marxism, Bolshevism, Socialism and any other system on earth knocked completely cold and down and out, as you will see. 
Occult Science teaches that the life-atoms of our Life Principle are never entirely lost when a man 'dies'. It teaches that the atoms impregnated with the Life Principle, which is an independent, eternal, conscious factor, are partially transmitted from the parents to their offspring by heredity, and partially drawn together with the new body 
and become the animating principle of it in every new incarnation of each Entity. The reason for this is that, as the Individual Soul and Higher Mind is ever the same (we should call it Soul-Mind), so the collective aggregation of these atoms form the World-Soul, the Anima Mundi, of our Solar System in its Septenary Body, the Soul of our little universe of Sun and Planets, each atom being and having a Soul, a little universe endowed with consciousness and memory. 
When a man dies the Higher Mind remains in the super-physical Essence of his Astral constitution, or Astral Body.....composed of atoms of a higher rate of vibration than those of the earthly body. The atoms of the Astral Body, thus functioning on a different rate of vibration Spiritual Vibration, which is not subject to decay — are the cause of the Astral Body not changing its structure as is the case with the human body. It remains the same throughout its sojourn in the Four Lower Divine Planes, of which the Earth is the lowest. We may therefore say that the Astral Body is constructed of a Spiritual-Material Substance, which is a substance not known on Earth, and which cannot be discovered by any material processes of the Physicists. Yet it appears to be as solid on the Astral Planes as the human body seems to be on Earth. This Astral body, with its own atoms, therefore, enters each new body it becomes connected with in every new incarnation as a human. Now this law has been misinterpreted in Madame Blavatsky's 'Secret Doctrine', in which it is stated that: "The atoms of the lower principles (the body), drawn as they are by affinity and Karmic Law always to the same individuality in a series of various bodies", means there that each new human body is composed of the same atoms, etc., which always composed every body of the same Entity in past incarnations. This is not so. It is only the Astral body that is ever composed of the same atoms, whether it occupies a human body on Earth for a time, or dwells by itself in the Second, Third or Fourth Plane. Besides this, there is still another aspect of the whole principle of bodies, which we shall discuss in due course. Just as a man has an 'Astral body', so has a planet, globe or satellite such a body. For planets are born, live, die and disintegrate in the same manner almost as the body of a man goes through these processes; the only difference being in connection with the 'birth' of the Planets, etc. 

You know already that there are three secret Planets, not visible to man. These are three that once had life and material being each Planet has Its Planetary Spirit at all stages too, and those Astral Planets serve a deep purpose, which is also the subject of later studies in the Inner Circle. The Astral form of a man is surrounded by an egg-shaped aura, the same as the human body, where that aura is no more nor less than the aura of the Astral body within it. It is its protecting shield, warding off any entities that are inimical to it, and allowing free blending with those that have affinity to the being within that aura, or magnetic field, ever radiating in all directions, attracting and repulsing, as the case may be. Thus you will see that there can be no real danger to the 'human' Entity in its Astral body, for its auric shield ever protects it. As a matter of fact, the same applies to us in our human, earthly body. The moment we are approached by some person who is inimical to our well being there comes a flash of warning to our Higher Minds, causing a feeling of repulsion or distrust. That this warning is more often ignored than not is due to the density of our material frame, which may intercept such messages; or the Higher Mind is not sufficiently refined or evolved to be able to interpret the message correctly. Or it wilfully ignores the warning for some reason or another, often because the lower mind is attracted to the lower mind of that potential enemy, and the Higher Mind is not sufficiently strong to control the lower. There are many other reasons which you will be able to discover for yourself by now. 
The Astral form always contains the Principle of Life! It is that Principle which animates the human body with the first breath. Before that first breath is taken the Life Principle of the mother animates the body of the baby to be born. You will therefore see that the child is practically lifeless between the two moments when it is separated from the mother's Life Principle and when it draws in its own Life Principle with the first breath. Fortunately the mother's Life Principle takes a few moments to 'evaporate' from the baby's body, and this short period forms a sort of 'bridge', as it were, which the old and true Entity has to cross to enter into the new tiny body. But here again: the 'size' of the Astral body does not come into consideration. When the human body 'dies' the Astral body leaves it again, carrying away with it its eternal Life Principle; hence: "Ye have..... eternal Life". 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
*Science now claims that the various types of subatomic particles can be identified by the varying thicknesses and curvatures of the tracks which these infinitesimal fragments leave in bubble chambers. It is said that the points from whence these tracks emanate indicate the actual position of the collisions, while the numerous curves are caused by their magnetic fields. 
