SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 9. 

Dear Disciple, 
In order to preserve a straight line in our present studies we shall develop in the next several lectures the study of Devas, Fairies, Elementals, the Elements and allied subjects, as all these are closely connected with the Beings in the Higher Astral Realms beyond the Earth, and in order that you may have all those details close together in the first group of lectures of this grade. 
The Devas constitute one of the ranks or orders of spirits who compose the Hierarchy which rules the Kosmos under the Hidden Logos and the Universe under the Supreme Deity. Their numbers are vast and their functions are not generally known to mankind, but only to a select circle of Adepts and Masters of the Higher Mysteries. But we may say that those functions are connected with the evolution of the various systems of life on the Earth and beyond. There are three general divisions of Devas. The first and highest are the so-called 'Bodiless' Devas, because they act and manifest on the three highest Astral Planes and are invisible to the entities on the Planes below. Their bodies are composed of mental Elemental Essence, for they belong to the higher mental and Spiritual Worlds, Regions or Planes of existence. The next, and lower, Group are called 'Form' Devas, for, while their bodies are also composed of mental Elemental Essence, this is an essence of a denser nature and composition, and they belong to the Elemental Kingdoms of Planes 2, 3 and 4 beyond the Earth. The lowest orders of Devas are sometimes called 'Passion' Devas; they belong to Planes 2 and 3 only, and their bodies are composed of so-called Astral Elemental Essence, again denser than the essence of the Form Devas. All are creatures superlatively great and glorious; they have vast knowledge and power; they are calm, yet irresistible, and in appearance they are truly magnificent. They can be perceived plainly by the higher classes of clairvoyants, and very good descriptions of them can be found in the books of Geoffrey Hodson, such as 'The Kingdom of the Gods' illustrated by Ethelwynne M. Quail and published by The Theosophical Publishing House, Quest Books and others. There is no space or time in these lectures to give complete descriptions of the colours and appearance of the Devas, but any student interested in the subject should try to obtain the above book, new or second-hand; it should not be very expensive. 
These three classes of Devas are the same as the Angels of the Roman Catholic Church, and the early Christian Fathers not only retained their faith in the power and ministry of the Angels and Spirits, on Earth, but they proved that faith by the works of the Spirit, which they performed as their Master commanded them, and for some centuries after His death they looked with suspicion on those who failed to render this important testimony to their belief in Christianity. Not only did they believe in those good and great Angels, but they believed also in the beings of the lower Planes, below the Earth, and in their evil machinations; and Tertullian, one of the most zealous of the second century converts to Christianity, sternly advised that: "any persons calling themselves Christians, who could not even expel demons, or heal the sick, should be put to death as imposters". 

The celebrated Bishops, Montanus and Gregory, Origen, St. Martin, Theophilus and numerous other eminent Christian Fathers, urged that the same test suggested by Tertullian should be required of professing Christians. They alleged their own willingness to submit to such an ordeal, and report confirms that they gave continual evidence of their ability to sustain their claims. 

In every land where gregarious man yet resolves himself into national communities, the exceptional gifts of Seers and Prophets have furnished means by which spirit visitants glance athwart the darkened paths of mortality. Spirit voices have resounded in the air, as well as in the inner ear of the clairaudient. Semblances of the so-called 'dead' have been seen in full light, in twilight, and as luminous shapes at night in pitch darkness.....luminous forms radiant with the glory of a better land, or shapes of woe, shipwrecked waifs from the shores of a hereafter they will not or cannot accept, all doing their part in forming a chain of perpetual spiritual revelation; except to those who are wilfully blind and deaf. The touch of a loving hand of the dear one who has passed on before us has been felt; not, however, in the shape of the ghastly 'materialised' monstrosities of the spiritualistic séance, for these are either frauds or the manipulations of certain ethereal matter by the lower elementals. The realms of spiritual existence have never been without witness in human consciousness. Blank materialism, or bigoted ecclesiasticism have never had the right to say, in any decade of time, that "the vision is closed; the gates of the eternal city are shut"; or, "the canon of revelation is ended". There are crowds of true witnesses in every clime and time who have beheld, as in a flash, the glories of the higher and the terrors of the lower realms. They have stood for a short space of time beside the beloved's new form, more glorious than any shape on Earth, and received the Kiss of Benediction; they have listened to the dear and unforgettable voice, speaking once again in dulcet, sweet emotion as of yore, receiving strength to carry on when all the world seemed bleak and drear, and only endless longing filled the lonely heart, and agony benumbed the mind. They have seen far beyond the dull and slow vibrations of the world as known to man, and gazed at the wonders of the Higher Realms; and even at that time when on account of internal luxury and external pride the aristocratic rulers of the Christian Churches in the sixth and seventh centuries succeeded in driving spirit influence from their midst, and finding themselves deprived of spiritual gifts, and rebuked by the sight of laymen performing those apostolic works required of them in proof of their Faith, they then resolved in solemn council "that henceforth it should be unlawful for any layman to attempt the rites of exorcism, or the cure of disease, by the laying on of hands", yet did they never once succeed in closing the portals of revelation to those who were worthy of this boon of the Gods by reason of their inner purity and peace. Thus the Seers of all ages have beheld the Devas, higher and lower elemental forms, and the denizens of the 'pit'. 
The word 'Deva' is derived from the root 'Div', to shine; and in Hindu Mythology it means 'a God', of whom there are sometimes believed to be 33 in number; 11 for each of the "Three Worlds': i.e., Swarga, Bhumi, and Patāla, or heaven, earth and hell. 
In Chapter One of Ezekiel there is a direct reference to the "Four Great Kings of the Devas", or the four high rulers over the four cardinal points and elements. The square Tabernacle raised by Moses in the wilderness had the same cosmical significance. "Thou shalt make a hanging....of blue, purple and scarlet....five pillars of shittim wood for the hanging....four brazen rings in the four corners thereof....boards of fine wood for the four sides, North, South, West and East....of the Tabernacle....with Cherubims of cunning work". The five pillars refer to the five senses and five Root Races, esoterically, for it is through the four high rulers that our five senses may become cognizant of the hidden truths of Nature; and not at all, as Clemens would have it, that it is the elements per se that furnished the 'Pagans' with Divine Knowledge, or the Knowledge of God. The Tabernacle and the square courtyard, Cherubim and all, were precisely the same as those in the Egyptian Temples. The square form of the Tabernacle meant just the same thing as it still means today in the exoteric worship of the Chinese and Tibetans; namely: the four cardinal points, signifying that which the four sides of the pyramids, obelisks etc., mean. Josephus declares that the Tabernacle pillars were the same as those raised at Tyre to the four elements, which were placed on pedestals whose four angles faced the four cardinal points; adding that: "the angles of the pedestals had the four figures of the Zodiac" on them, which represented the same orientation. The idea may be traced in the Zoroastrian caves, in the rock-cut Temples of India, and in all the sacred square buildings of antiquity that still survive. Of the four points and elements the 'Four of Maharajahs', or Deva Kings, are the Regents and Directors. In the words of the Rev. Joseph Edkins, "they preside each over one of the four continents into which the Hindus divide the world....Each leads an army of spiritual beings to protect mankind". The Hindus, however, happen to divide the world into seven continents, exoterically as well as esoterically; and their 'four' cosmic Devas are eight, presiding over the eight points of the compass and not over the continents. The 'Four' are the protectors of mankind, whereas the 'Lipika', who are the "Judges that weigh the deeds of each personality, are concerned with humanity's hereafter". The 'Four' are those "who have the likeness of a man", Ezekiel's vision, called by the translators of the Bible "Cherubim”, “Seraphim”, etc.; by the Occultists "Winged Globes", "Fiery Wheels", etc.; and in the Hindu Pantheon, by a number of different names, such as Gandharvas, Sweet Songsters, Asuras, Kinnaras and Nagas; all these are the allegorical descriptions of the Four Mahārājahs. The Seraphim and the Fiery Serpents of Heaven we find in a passage, describing Mount Meru as "the exalted mass of glory, the venerable haunt of Gods and Heavenly Choristers....not to be reached by sinful men....because guarded by the Serpents". They are also called the Avengers, and the "Winged Wheels". Their mission and character being explained, let us see what the Christian Bible-interpreters say of the Cherubim. "The word signifies in Hebrew, fullness of knowledge; these angels are so- called from their exquisite knowledge, and were therefore used for the punishment of men who affected Divine Knowledge", interprets Cruden in his 'Concordance', from Genesis 3:24. 
The Devas are the collective aggregate of Divine Intelligence or Primordial Mind and they are the origin of Form. The Guardian Spirits of the human race, they are "those who dwell in the neighbourhood of the Immortals, and thence watch over human affairs", as Hermes says. The ancient teachings tell us that "The Sons of Earth regard the Sons of the Angel-Spheres as their Gods; and the Sons of the lower kingdoms look up to the man of Earth as their Gods; men remaining unaware of it in their blindness". In other words, the elemental forces are quite at the service of man, if he but knows how to use them. Having no elements of personality in their essence, they have no personal qualities, and are merely 'conditions' of essences. Man, being a compound of the essences of all the 'Celestial' or 'Astral' Hierarchies, may succeed in making himself, as such, superior, in one sense, to any Hierarchy or Class, or even combination of them. "Man can neither propitiate nor command the Devas", it has been said. But, by paralysing his lower mind, or by subduing it, he can arrive at the full knowledge of the non-separateness of his Higher Self from the One Absolute Self, and so acquire to some extent the same Divine Powers of the One Absolute Self, thus being able to rule and control all that is below his Higher Self. And this can be done only by way of the Path of Peace.....which leads to that Secret Power. Thus he will be able to eat the 'fruit of knowledge' and become as powerful as a Deva, in the ultimate. And once he thus attunes with and reaches that Plane of the Spirit of Solidarity and Perfect Harmony (which reigns in every separate Hierarchy), this Spirit must extend over him, and protect him in every particular. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
