SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 8. 

Dear Disciple, 
In this grade we have given you thus far some of the ancient teachings in connection with the Astral Regions, and the creation of Man by some of their inhabitants. 

If we take the question of "spontaneous generation", life Science tells us - has not always reigned on our Earth. There was a time when even the 'Moneron' of Haeckel a simple globule of Protoplasm had not yet appeared at the bottom of the seas. Whence came the impulse which caused the molecules of carbon, nitrogen etc., to group themselves in what Oken has called the 'Urschleim', the primeval ooze, or jelly, since christened 'Protoplasm"? What were the prototypes of the Monera? Did they arrive here from other planets in the Universe? And if so, by what means were they carried from those other planets to Earth? Unless the Occult Teaching is accepted, we are compelled to face a 'miracle'.....and there is no such thing in Nature. Or we have to accept the theory of a personal, anthropomorphic creator, the attributes and definitions of whom, as formulated by the Monotheists, clash as much with Philosophy and Logic, as they degrade the ideal of an Infinite Universal Deity, before whose incomprehensible, awful grandeur the highest human intellect feels dwarfed. Let not the modern Philosopher, while arbitrarily placing himself on the highest pinnacle of human intellectuality hitherto evolved, show himself spiritually and intuitionally so far below the conceptions of even the ancient Greeks, themselves on a far lower level, in these respects, than the Philosophers of Eastern Aryan Antiquity. 

Hylozoism, when philosophically understood, is the highest aspect of Pantheism. It is the only possible escape from idiotic Atheism based on lethal materiality, and the still more idiotic anthropomorphic conceptions of the Monotheists, between which it stands on its own entirely neutral ground. 
Hylozoism demands Absolute Divine Thought, which would pervade the numberless active, creating Forces, or "Creators", which Entities are moved by and have their being in, from, and through, the Divine Thought, the latter, nevertheless, having no more personal concern in them or their creations, than the Sun has in the sunflower and its seeds, or in vegetation in general. Such active "Creators" are known to exist and are believed in, because perceived and sensed by the inner Man in the Occultist in other words: by the Higher Mind, by attunement with the Soul, which is ever linked up with these Universal Conditions, Powers and Beings. Thus the evolved Occultist says that an Absolute Deity, having to be unconditioned and unrelated, cannot be thought of at the same time as an active, creating, One living God, without immediate degradation of the ideal, a Deity that manifests in Space and Time these two simply being the forms of THAT which is absolute ALL can be but a fractional part of the whole. And since this "ALL" cannot be divided in its Absoluteness, therefore that sensed Creator or Creators can be at best but the mere aspect thereof. Even the moderately religious Aristotle remarked that the work of direct creation would be quite unbecoming to God; and Plato and other Philosophers taught the same: deity cannot set its own hand to creation. Laertius states that Zeno said: "Nature is a habit moved from itself, according to seminal principles; perfecting and containing those several things which in determinate times are produced from it, and acting agreeably to that from which it was secreted". 
Zechariah (3:9) refers to the "one stone" with "seven eyes"; 1 Peter (2:2-5.) refers also to "stones", for in the old symbolism, "man", chiefly the inner spiritual man, is called a "stone". Christ is the corner- stone, and Peter refers to all men as "lively" (living) stones. Therefore a "stone with seven eyes" on it refers to a man whose constitution, i.e., his 'principles', is septenary. In Exodus 17:7 ("Is the Lord among us, or not?") the text should read, according to "The Greater Holy Assembly'; "Is the Tetragrammaton in the midst of us, or the Negatively Existent One?", when a distinction is made between Microprosopus, who is called Tetragrammaton, and between Macroprosopus, who is called 'Ain', the Negatively Existent. Hence, in symbolical language, Tetragrammaton is the Three made Four and the Four made Three, and is represented on this Earth by his seven 'Companions', or 'Eyes' the "seven eyes of the Lord". Microprosopus is, at best, only a secondary manifested deity; while Tetragrammaton is the four-fold 'Heavenly Man', a pure Spirit, resolved into septenary man, pure matter and spirit. 

In one of the ancient teachings it is said: "The early Second (Root) Race were the Fathers of the 'Sweat-born'; the later Second (Root) Race were 'Sweat-born' themselves". This refers to the work of evolution from the beginning of that Race to its close. The "Sons of Yoga", or the Primitive Astral Race, had seven stages of evolution racially, or collectively; as every individual being in it had, and has now. It is not Shakespeare only who divided the ages of man into a series of seven, but Nature does so too. In the Bible and in Tradition the Gibborim, the giants or "mighty ones", the Rephaim, the spectres or the "phantoms", the Nephilim, or the "fallen ones", are shown as identical, though they were "all men". These names, which belong by right only to the four preceding Races and the earliest beginning of the Fifth, allude very clearly to the first two Phantom (Astral) Races, to the "Fallen" Race the Third, and to the Race of the Atlantean Giants the Fourth, after which "men began to decrease in stature". 
It is only in the Fourth Race that men, who had lost all right to be considered divine, resorted to body-worship. Till then, they had been truly Gods, as pure and divine as their progenitors. And it was only after his defection from the Neo-Platonists, that Clement of Alexandria began to translate "gigantes" by "serpentes", explaining that "serpents and giants signify demons". 
Man's organism was adapted in every Race to its surroundings. The First Root Race was as ethereal as ours is material. The progeny of the Seven Creators, who evolved the Seven Primordial Adams, required no purified gases to breathe and live upon, and most Occultists are agreed that the first physical man evolved in Lemuria about 18,000,000 years ago. (*See note at end of this lecture). 
The First Race - the ethereal or astral, also called the "Self-born" - was, in our sense, speechless, for it was devoid of mind. The Second Race had a 'sound-language', to wit, chant-like sounds composed of vowels alone. The Third Race developed in the beginning a kind of language which was only a slight improvement on the various sounds in Nature, on the cry of gigantic insects and of the first animals, which, however, were hardly nascent in the day of the "Sweat-born", or the early Third Race. In its second half, when the "Sweat-born" gave birth to the "Egg-born", the middle Third Race, and when these, instead of "hatching out" a rather ridiculous sounding expression when applied to human beings in our age as androgynous beings, began to evolve into separate males and females, and when the same law of evolution led them to produce their kind sexually- an act which forced the Creative Gods to incarnate mindless men, then only was speech developed. But even then it was still no better than a tentative effort. The whole human race was at that time of "one language and of one lip". This did not prevent the last two sub-races of the Third Root Race from building cities, and sowing far and wide the first seeds of civilisation under the guidance of their Divine Instructors, and their own already awakened minds. At the close of the Third Root Race man had already evolved monosyllabic speech. These men were the "golden coloured", yellow complexioned men. Previously the principal communication was by means of what would now be called 'thought-transference', although with the exception of the Race called "Sons of Will and Yoga" - the first in whom the "Sons of Wisdom" had incarnated - thought was but very little developed in nascent physical man, and never soared above a low terrestrial level. 
Agglutinative speech developed with some of the Atlantean races, and the "cream" of the Fourth Race gravitated more and more toward the apex of physical and intellectual evolution, thus leaving as an heirloom to the nascent Fifth (the Aryan) Race the inflectional, highly developed languages, and the agglutinative decayed and remained as a fragmentary fossil idiom, now scattered, and nearly limited to the aboriginal tribes of America such as the Lakota or Sioux. 
Inflectional speech, which is the root of the Sanskrit, very erroneously called the "elder sister" of the Greek, instead of its mother was the first language, now the mystery tongue of the Initiates, of the Fifth Race. It is interesting in connection with Higher Mind memory to note here that we have seen an example of this language in the manuscript of a book written by an author living in London. Even the characters of the letters, or ideographs, in which this language was written can be seen and understood by some Initiates today; we shall have more to say about this later on. 
 
As all is Septenary in Nature, so is each Astral Plane sevenfold, but we should never forget that in every one of the seven Planes all is reflection from the Divine; this applies to the lowest elementary form as well as to the Highest Angel there; all these are but reflections in the Astral Light. The psychic and ectenic forces of the Spiritualists, the ❝ideo-motor" and "electro-biological powers", "latent thought", even "unconscious cerebration" theories can be condensed in the term: "the Kabalistic Astral Light". Therein are all the germs of life on all the seven planes of being, and they make up the totality of the subjective and objective man. These exoteric germs, which are closely united in the pictures, or reflections, in the Astral Light, have to do with the physical atoms and vibrations and with objective man; the Esoteric ones with the Higher Mind. The Elementals within that Light are simply effects producing effects. They may even be good and bad thoughts. Such remain crystallised within it and are attracted by affinity and galvanised back into life again; and they may follow a man from incarnation to incarnation. They can be paralysed by reverse effects; in other words: bad thoughts can be neutralised by good ones. 
The Earth and its Astral Light are closely related to each other, as are all the Astral Planes around (or within) the Earth. But we must never forget that there is also a greater Astral Light, which is Universal, and in which all the rest of the Universe floats as it were, or is lit up by. For this reason the untrained clairvoyant who is ignorant of the Occult Laws may mistake the denizens of one Astral Realm for another. He may even penetrate into the Universal Astral Light and behold strange scenes there which will give him an entirely wrong idea of the conditions in the Astral Realms connected with our Kosmos. Or he may see some of the great Teachers in Realm Four and mistake them for the Deity and his Choir of Divine Spirits, as happened to Swedenborg. So long as a man has not quite mastered the preliminary studies it is idle to anthropomorphise the formless. By "formless" is meant the higher and the lower gods, the supermundane as well as mundane Spirits, or Beings, which to the untrained intellect, to the Disciple, will be visible only by its Aura. The visions of full figures casually perceived by sensitives and mediums belong to one or another of the only three categories they can see: Astral Forms of living men, during their projection, generally when they are asleep; Adepts, whose human forms are dead but have learnt to live in the Astral Light in their aethereal personalities; and Elementaries and Elementals masquerading in shapes borrowed from the Astral Light in general, or from figures in the 'mind's eye' of the audience at a séance or of the medium, which are immediately reflected in their respective Auras. 
Such then are some of the 'inhabitants of the Astral Worlds', as discussed in these first eight lectures of Grade 3. We hope that you have found these discussions of interest, and as this lecture completes another 'Step', you may now write to us as usual if you wish; but, please, study these eight lectures deeply before doing so, for it is quite probable that any questions you may wish to ask about them are already answered within them. 
NOTE: With reference to the evolution of physical man some 18,000,000 years ago in Lemuria, mentioned on page 3, Science continues to gradually extend the history of man. In 1963, Scientific American stated: "A controversy over the age of Zinjanthropus (now re- classified as Paranthropus), the Australopithecine hominid from Olduvai Gorge in East Africa, has ended with agreement that he and related early Australopithecine hominids from South Africa lived nearly two million years ago. The date not only stretches out the evolution of man but also promises to push back the beginning of the Pleistocene, the geological epoch of the ice ages, to three million years ago." 
An article published in the same journal in May 1977, under the heading 'Ramapithecus' (now considered by Science to belong to one or more species of Sivapithecus), presumes the last appearance of Australopithecus to be about four million years ago. 
Science has now pushed back the evolution of man even further. We quote from National Geographic News, July 2002: "A team of researchers excavating in northern Chad has unearthed the well- preserved skull and other fossilised remains of what they believe was a previously unknown hominid, or early human precursor, that lived six to seven million years ago." In a statement issued by Nature, which reported the discovery, Professor Daniel Lieberman of Harvard University said the new find, named Sahelanthropus tchadensis, "will have the impact of a small nuclear bomb." Lieberman was particularly intrigued by the creature's unusual mix of both primitive and advanced traits, noting that the braincase was chimp-like, but the face, teeth, and somewhat flattened head resembled those of humans. 
As we update this Lecture in 2015, an article published in New Scientist in October of that year reports: "Ape fossils put the origin of humanity at 10 million years ago." The article goes on to say: "David Begun of the University of Toronto in Canada reanalysed fossils of Dryopithecus apes, which lived in Europe as early as about 12.5 million years ago." We leave the scientists to argue over whether the remains are those of a gorilla or man. But it would appear that palaeontologists are gradually extending the history of man beyond the wildest dreams of many just a few years ago and are coming more and more to our line of thinking- even though we say they are still about six million years out in their reckoning! 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
