SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 7. 

Dear Disciple, 
When we read in the Sacred Books that Prophets like Enoch and Elijah, or the Astrologer at the Court of Izdubar, the Chaldean Hea-Bani, are taken up to Heaven 'alive', this kind of easy 'death' or euthanasia, has an Esoteric meaning. Enoichion means in Greek the "Inner Eye", or the Seer; in Hebrew, with the help of the Masoteric points, it means the 'Initiator', and 'Instructor'. Elijah means in Hebrew "God-Jah", Jehovah, and also Elihu, which has the same meaning (from the root 'eli' or Deity). Hea-Bani was raised to Heaven by the God Hea, who was his patron, as Jehovah was of Elijah. 
This "death", symbolises the 'passing on' of any Adept who has reached the power and degree, as well as the 'purification', which enable him to die in the physical body and still live and lead a conscious life in his Astral Body. This is one way in which the Ancient Teachings inter- pret it. But it has more than one meaning, like everything else. You know that when any human 'dies' his Astral Body etc., is simply withdrawn from his human body and continues to live on elsewhere in more or less perfect states of activity and consciousness in Realms Two and Three. But the 'Adept' is he who passes straight on to Realm Four. The Pauline expression "that he should not see death", has thus an with anything Esoteric meaning, without being connected 'supernatural'. When we are told that Enoch will share with Elijah and Christ the honours and bliss of the last Advent and of the destruction of Antichrist this means that some of the great Adepts will return in the Seventh Race, when all error will be ended and the Advent of Truth will be heralded by those Shista, the Holy 'Sons of light', the Teachers, Adepts, Sages and so on, and the gross material body of our Kosmos Antichrist will enter once more into its state of rest and sleep. 

Now; what classes of Beings dwell within that Fourth Realm to which the Adepts are translated; that Path of the Sun, or rather the Terminus of that Path, of which we have spoken so often? This Realm is like any other Astral Realm beyond the Earth - of very vast extent. There are pure and enlightened Beings there of all Classes. There are the great Adepts and Teachers, as well as all those who are less advanced in Wisdom but full of goodness; and this leads us at once to a very interesting question. At what time did the 'Gods' create Man in his infinite variety of Wisdom, intellect, goodness, purity and its opposites of the same; and how did they succeed in doing all this creating? 
The First Primordial Emanations from the Divine Creative Power- the First Cause and Root of All-consist of Principles and Beings of so pure - a nature that they cannot have any connection with our Matter in any way as long as they remain in that state of Perfection. For the sake of convenient understanding we may say that such are those that people the Seventh, and Highest Spiritual Plane or Realm. The Ancient Doctrine tells us that when they were 'commanded' by the Hidden Logos (the Supreme God of a Kosmos) to 'create' Man, some refused to do so. Nor would they multiply themselves!! This is, of course, an allegory. These latent and transitional Forces, Principles and Beings, can develop only towards the material as they descend from the highest to the lowest rungs of the derived from Septenary Ladder. For this reason the Aryan Teachings after that 'refusal' created seven fur- Atlantis state that Brahmā ther 'Mind-born' Sons, who were named; Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishtha. The latter is often replaced by Daksha, the most prolific of the Creators. These are all the creators of the various beings on this Earth, in the early Manvantaras or Races. Of course, the names of these creators do not matter at all; they are merely for convenience. Marichi, for instance, was supposed to be the Chief of these 'Maruts', or Prajapatis, or Lords of Creatures. Some authorities include Bhrigu and Nārada, and the Mahabharata mentions twenty-one. In the Purānas Atri is the Father of Soma, the Moon; and so on. Each had to play a definite part in the scheme of creation. In addition to being the creators of the various beings on Earth they appear also as diverse reincarnations in the early Manvantaras or Races. 
The First Emanations or Beings in the Highest Astral Realms - de- void of the grosser 'creative fire', and being 'formless', were unable for this reason to create Man. Yet it is they alone who could give to Man his higher consciousness, and this they did after the 'lower' Rishis had made Man, first in his shadowy or astral form, then placing within that form the Spark of Life, and at last projecting these two Principles within the earthly form, after the Higher Mind had been placed within the Astral Body by those higher Angels of the Primary Creation, the Soul accompanying the Astral Body everywhere. A number of the higher Angels descended into Matter, whilst others refused to do so; and these latter were the 'rebellious' Angels, fighting and opposing the 'Gods', because, as the allegory shows, those higher Angels who refused had no merit of their own, and dreading the sanctity of those self-striving incarnated Beings who had become Yogis, Ascetics and Adepts, and thus threatened to upset the 'power' of the former by their self-acquired powers; wherefore they denounced them. Some Rishis-Yogis are shown in the Puranas to be far more powerful than the so-called Gods and Angels. But all secondary Gods or temporary Powers are doomed to disappear in the end; it is only the Spiritual Potentiality in Man, aided by progress through experience leading to Wisdom, which can help Man to become One with the Infinite and the Absolute. 
Thus we find that the 'obedient' Angels, after descending into the lower parts of the Astral Realms above Earth, created a soul-less, mind-less and will-less man, while it was left to the 'rebels', who refused to descend, to give Man a Soul and Higher Mind. It is the 'Harbinger of Light', bright radiant Lucifer, who 'opened the eyes' of the who was the first automaton created by Jehovah, as alleged; and he to whisper: "in the day ye eat thereof ye shall be as Elohim (gods), can only be regarded in the light of a Saviour; knowing good and evil" the personification of those 'rebels'. An 'Adversary' to Jehovah, the "personating spirit", Lucifer still remains in Esoteric Truth the ever-loving "Messenger", the Angel, the Seraphim and Cherubim who both "knew" well, and "loved" still more, and who conferred on us the latter would have Spiritual, instead of Physical Immortality been a kind of static immortality that would have made of Man an undying sort of Wandering Jew. Thus the Allegory. But it is based on the true Laws of the Universe and on the true facts in connection with our creation. That which propels towards, and forces evolution, that which compels the growth and development of Man towards perfection is the combination of lower and Higher Mind in the living body of a man, and the lower mind alone in the inferior species of any living being. The acts in this way on account of a Higher Mind through the Soul Force inherent in itself; the lower mind strives towards perfection in the same way as a forest tree forces its way upwards to the light of the Sun; by instinct. Owing to the identity of the Soul-Mind with the All-Force of the Higher Planes, inherent in the material being, on our plane it remains all-potential, while in the Spiritual Realms it is all-potent. As it is with the tree, so it is with the Higher Mind; unless the latter gravitates of its own Will, instinct or desire to the Spiritual, the lower mind will overcome it, just as a non-striving tree might be overcome and killed by undergrowth or rival trees with a stronger instinct. 
It is said in the Teachings that: "The Spirits of the Earth clothed the Shadows (of the Early Race) and expanded them". The Higher Astral Self is therefore temporarily bound to those Spirits of the Earth. But on the other hand the Solar Spirits warm the Shadows within the mortal man; and that warming Principle - the Spark - ever wants to return to its own Source, just as the Soul-Mind wants to return to its spiritual source. 
The medieval Kabalists taught that: "the Kabalah was first taught by God Himself to a select company of Angels who formed a theosophic school in Paradise (No connection with the Theosophical Society, of course!). After the Fall the Angels most graciously communicated this heavenly doctrine to the disobedient child of Earth, to furnish the protoplast with the means of returning to their pristine nobility and felicity". This shows how the incident of the Sons of God, marrying and imparting the Divine Secrets to the Daughters of Men -- as allegorically told by Enoch and in the sixth chapter of Genesis -- was interpreted by the Christian Kabalists. 


The whole of this period may be regarded as the pre-human period, that of Divine Man, or as plastic Protestant Theology now has it; the Pre-Adamite period. But even Genesis begins its real history (chapter 6) with the giants of "those days" and the "Sons of God" the "daughters of man". This marrying and teaching their wives -- the "daughters of man". This period is also described in the Puranas; and relating as it does to days lost in archaic ages, hence pre-historic, how can any person feel certain whether the mankind of that period was or was not as he knows it now? The whole personnel of the Brahmanas and Puranas -- the Rishis, Prajapatis, Manus, their wives and progeny -- belong to that  pre-human period. All these are the Seed of humanity, as it were. It is around the descendants of these "Sons of God", the "mind-born" Astral Children of Brahma, that our physical frames have grown and developed into what they are now. 

Occult Science knows that the traditions of Esoteric Philosophy are right, because they are the most logical and reconcile every difficulty. We have, besides, the Egyptian Books of Thoth, the Book of the Dead, and the Hindu Purānas with their Seven Manus, as well as the Chaldæo-Assyrian accounts whose tiles mention seven primitive men, or Adams, the real meaning of which name may be ascertained by means of the Kabalah. Those who know anything of the Samothracian Mysteries will also remember that the generic name of the Kabiri was the "Holy Fires", which created on seven localities of the Island of Electria (or Samothrace) the "Kabir born of the Holy Lemnos” — the Island sacred to Vulcan. 
According to Pindar, this Kabir, whose name was Adamas, was, in the tradition of Lemnos, the type of primitive man born from the bosom of the Earth. He was the archetype of the first males in the order of generation, and was one of the seven autochthonous (literally, 'native to the soil') ancestors or progenitors of mankind. If, coupling with this fact that Samothrace was colonised by the Phoenicians, and before them by the mysterious Pelasgians who came from the East, we also remember the identity of the "Mystery" Gods of the Phoenicians, Chaldeans and Israelites, it will be easy to discover whence came also the confused account of the Noachian Deluge. It is undeniable that the Jews, who obtained their ideas from Moses, the Egyptian, compiled their Genesis and first cosmogonic traditions, when re-written by Ezra and others, from the Chaldæo-Akkadian account. It is, therefore, sufficient to examine the Babylonian and Assyrian cuneiform and other inscriptions to find also therein, scattered here and there, not only the original meaning of the name Adam, Admi or Adami, but also the creation of seven Adams, or roots of Men, born of Mother Earth, physically, and of the Divine Fire of the Progenitors, spiritually or Astrally. And in those early ages of the 'Shadows', astral evolution was alone in progress, and the astral and physical planes, though developing on parallel lines, had not yet any direct point of contact with one another. It must be very obvious that a shadow-like ethereal man is related by virtue of his organisation if such it can be called - only to that plane from which the substance of his being is derived. 
Four of the Orders or Classes of Angels, or Dhyan Chohans, were the Progenitors of the concealed Man; the subtle Inner Man. The Lunar Spirits were the ancestors of his Form, or the model according to which Nature began her external work upon him. But this 'first man' was but a senseless phantom, and the creation was a failure. The 'Spark' was next placed within him, which, as you know, is the Solar Fire. But again the attempt was a failure, for still the 'Man' was Mindless, and without a Soul. The 'Fathers' or lower Angels, are all Nature-Spirits, and the higher Elementals also possess an intelligence of their own; that Higher Fire of which we told you; the Fire which gives the human mind its Self-Perception, self-consciousness, or Spirit. Thus it was not until the three classes of Highest Angels or Dhyan Chohans (the Divine Rebels who refused to descend into the lower Planes), who are the Lords of Spiritual Life Eternal, took a hand in the matter that at last the complete man was produced.

"In the beginning (in the Second Race) some (of the Lords) only breathed of their Essence into Manushya (men), and some took in man their abode", states the ancient teaching. This shows that some men be- came incarnations of the 'Divine Ones', but only comparatively few of them. The rest had their Spirit 'breathed' into them, and although those latter and their numberless descendants will also return to the 'Source' in the course of evolution, they are not of the same high grade of intellect and spiritual Power, as the 'few' and their descendants were and are. 
So once again the 'inequalities' among men are explained. We trust that the great Scheme is now becoming clearer to you in many ways. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
