SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 13. 

Dear Disciple, 

We must now add another exercise in connection with the sacred centres of the human body. In Lecture 2 of Grade 2 we commenced with the heart centre, and our students have had some interesting experiences with this exercise, each of which has been dealt with separately in our private letters to these same students. The reason for dealing privately with such experiences is a twofold one. Firstly, because it is absolutely impossible to give general instructions to all students that will cover all possible phenomena. This is where every other Order fails as a rule; they try to treat these subjects in a dogmatic manner and are unable to deal with every aspect of their member's experiences, and this is due to either inexperience or neglect. Secondly, because we have found that a great number of our students have had certain esoteric revelations which cannot be dealt with in even these secret lectures of the outer Grades; for our teachings in connection with these things might fall into the wrong hands. Thus a number of our students have asked us certain questions based upon their own inner experiences, which questions deal with things of the Inner Teachings. We are always glad when this happens for it shows possibilities of very rapid development under careful guidance, and as a rule we give full information which deals with the much later teachings when these students come to us with their problems. At times we are compelled to hold them back a little, for if one goes too fast with such things there is the danger of creating a muddle in the minds of these talented members. This must be avoided at all times but although your Masters are ‘Hidden', they are always near enough to every student to supervise their progress by means of sometimes very involved additional instructions. Thus there is no generalisation in our work, apart from the weekly lectures, and those are so full of important information that no one could be justified if he did consider them but generalities; and we have never been accused of that either. It would only show that such a one had failed to benefit from the inner meanings in those teachings, which become clear to any student who carries out all the exercises and meditations faithfully and writes to us about them. 
The next centre we shall therefore concentrate upon is the solar plexus, situated in the neighbourhood of the navel. Whereas the Heart Centre is of a glowing golden colour, the solar plexus has a curious blending of several shades of red, although there is a good deal of green in it as well. It is in ten divisions, which are alternately chiefly red and chiefly green. Like the heart centre which is divided in twelve parts, four parts of three divisions the solar plexus is shaped like a wheel; and this is the shape of each of the seven centres. The solar plexus is very closely associated with feelings and emotions of diverse kinds. Meditate on this centre in the same manner as you did on the heart and report in four weeks time, if you will. The purpose of these meditations is to set these wheels in quicker motion, increasing their rotation, power and colours, and giving greater freedom to the inner senses. 
But we must here warn you very seriously about your meditations on this centre. Do not do it for more than about three minutes, twice a week, and if these meditations should bring about any signs of indigestion, sickness or discomfort....stop the exercise at once and write to us. There are not many persons who can do this meditation, but we should like to know if there are students among us who can. If you feel that you would rather not take this meditation, that will be quite in order; for you are a free agent in this as in all else. Do not forget your prayer for protection before and after this meditation!! Also be absolutely at Peace before you commence. When this particular centre comes into activity, one becomes more conscious of all kinds of Astral influences and beings, both pleasant and unpleasant. Unless the student has great courage and a steady mind and powerful will, this awareness might cause fright. With the Heart centre it is different; for when that is awakened it will bring one in closer touch and sympathy with other human beings, and with the knowledge our students have been accumulating this sympathy will make it possible to help others in a practical manner, on the lines of Lecture 14 of Grade 1. We have taken the Solar Plexus at this time of our studies in order to warn you of the dangers connected with it. There are a great many systems of so-called 'psychic' development that include exercises etc., in connection with the solar plexus. Avoid all such things as you would the plague; and we are not exaggerating when we say this. We shall soon give you further instructions regarding the centres, but if you feel the slightest apprehension about the present one, please pass it by. 
This is a most serious warning!! 
We shall now consider the five Elements a little closer, and commence this time with Earth. But let it be understood once and for all that the elements connected with our Planet or Globe cannot be taken as a standard for comparison with the elements of other worlds or planets. Each world has its own elements, and there are as many different kinds of elements as there are worlds, and this applies to those five elements we know and the other two not known. The individual elements make one Universal, collective Element, each of its own kind in a Septenary Universe, and each collective element is the aspect-entity of the one absolute Non-Entity, or Absolute Be-ness. 

"Millions and billions of Worlds are produced at every Manvantara", is the ancient teaching. Therefore there must be seven times as many elements as there are worlds, and each of these elements is to be considered as a conscious and intelligent force. To 'scientific' minds this may seem far-fetched; but the real scientific Occultist has very good reasons for considering all the Forces of Nature as true, though supersensuous, states of Matter, and as possible objects of perception to beings endowed with the requisite senses. 

You know that the correct order of the Elements is: Fire, Air, Water, Earth. Whereas the First Round of our Planetary Chain had only one element that could be perceived by the beings then in existence namely......cool, radiant Fire in our present Fourth Round we have sufficient senses to perceive and sense the first Four, and Earth, as a state of Matter, is the last of these Four, and the previous Three, in their present transformation, we also know. In short, none of the so-called elements were, in the three preceding Rounds, as they are now. 
All that has existence comes out of the same Matrix of the Universe, or spiritual and physical Nature. Paracelsus stated: "All production took place in consequence of separation. There were produced out of the Ideos the elements of Fire, Water, Air and Earth, whose birth, however, did not take place in a material mode, or by simple separation, but spiritually and dynamically, just as fire may come out of a pebble, or a tree out of a seed, although there is originally no fire in the pebble (that is; manifested fire, as we know it), nor a tree in the seed..... But as from the seed grow the roots and their fibres, afterwards the stalk with its branches and leaves, and lastly the flowers and seeds; likewise all beings were born from the Elements, and consist of elementary substances out of which other forms may come into existence, bearing the characteristics of their parents. The elements as the mothers of all creatures are of an invisible, spiritual nature, and have souls. They all spring from the Mysterium Magnum". 
This doctrine, preaching the nature of the elements 350 years ago, is identical with that of Darwin, and in the Sankhya philosophy of Kapila it is still further elaborated. 
In the Vishnu Purana it is stated; "From Primordial Substance, presided over by embodied Spirit proceeds the unequal development (or Evolution) of those qualities.....From the great Principle 'Intellect'.....is produced the origin of the subtle elements and of the organs of sense". 
The Egyptian Hermes says: "Oh, my son, matter becomes; formerly it was; for matter is the vehicle of becoming. Becoming is the mode of activity of the un-create and foreseeing God. Having been endowed with the germ of becoming, (objective) matter is brought into birth, for the creative Force fashions it according to the Ideal Forms. Matter not yet engendered had no form; it becomes, when it is put into operation". 
Thus the fundamental Truths of Nature were universally understood in antiquity, and the basic ideas upon Spirit, Matter and the Universe, or upon God, Substance and Man, were identical. By comparing the two most ancient religions, or religious philosophies in the world, Hinduism and Hermeticism, from the Scriptures of India and Egypt, the identity of the two is easily recognised and finds an echo in the statement of Paracelsus quoted above. 
But although the stars differ in their constituent materials, and exhibit elements quite unknown on Earth, nevertheless, this does not affect the fact that Primeval Matter Matter as it appeared even in its first differentiation from its condition beyond the zero-line of action, that which is called 'Laya', is yet homogeneous at immense distances, in the depths of infinitude, and likewise at points not far removed from the outskirts of our solar system. 
We stated just now that we are in the 'Fourth Round'. The Earth, as a Globe, was at first in an 'ethereal' condition; as the cycles of time went by it gradually consolidated, until it reached its last consolidated state. But the ancient teachings tell that during the middle period of the Lemuro-Atlantean Race, the Earth, Man and everything on our Globe, were of a still grosser and more material nature than they have been during the last million years or so. But the cycles of time that have passed since the Lemuro-Atlantean times have carried us forward towards the opposite goal of dematerialisation. As Madame Blavatsky once said: "The Earth, ourselves, and all things have softened since then aye, even our brains". So it becomes evident that during the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh stages this 'softening' process must continue, until in the end the Earth, Man and everything else will become ethereal again and refined, so that what is now gross matter, will become of an 'Astral', or shining, starry, pellucid nature, while what are now the 'Astral' Regions must necessarily progress along the same road towards a blending with the Higher Spiritual Realms, while those present Higher Spiritual Realms will blend with what we call the 'Divine' Realm of utmost perfection the true Source of ALL. 
After the end of the Seventh Round, the end of the Great Cycle, there will still be seven regions, containing those who have lagged behind on the ladder of evolution, and those, in their various grades, will be the beings who have to play their role in the next Manvantara, according to their then state of evolution. Thus the gigantic plan is unfolding itself gradually before your inner eye. Once again then will the new 'Elohim' create Heaven, Earth and Man; and there will be other Elohim who do not, and another Jeremiah will raise up and curse the latter. The Spirit of God will move once more on new 'waters' and 'brood' over the deep; there will be a new Adam, and another Eve, "the Mother of all the Lords and Gods or of all living". New Messiahs and Messengers will send forth their Divine Teachings, and most of it will fall upon the deaf ears of the new multitudes. The 'Three Fires', the Electric, the Solar and that caused by friction will burn again in their respective forms of Soul, Higher Mind and Lower Mind, and Earth and Man will be again the products of these Three Fires. 
May we all have passed on to the Divine when this comes to pass again, as surely it must and will. 
This lecture completes the First Triangle of our Third Pyramid. If there are any questions we shall be pleased to hear from you as usual. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
