SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 12. 
Dear Disciple, 
The minstrels and romancers had a widely different concept of the Fairies; and when we compare their descriptions with the calm and peaceful abodes of the departed warriors, according to the pictures drawn by Homer and Pindar, we shall see that in the eyes of the medieval authors, and those before, nothing was beautiful or good when divested from the pomp and pride of chivalry; and chivalry has, accordingly, entered deeply into the composition of their tales about these ideal realms. 
The 'Faeries' of romance may be divided into three kinds: Avalon, placed in the ocean, like the Island of the Blest; those that, like the palace of Pari Banou, are within the Earth; and lastly, those that, like Oberon's domains, are situate "in wilderness among the holtis hairy." 
Of the castle and isle of Avalon (not to be confused with Glastonbury, in spite of what some writers have said about this), the abode of Arthur and Oberon, and Morgue la Faye, the fullest description is to be seen in the romance of Ogier le Danois. The Faëry of the second kind is nowhere so fully and circumstantially described as in the beautiful romance of Orfeo and Heurodis, to be found in 'Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border' compiled by Sir Walter Scott. Thomas the Rymer has also described this kind of fairy. These tales and poems have suggested many incidents to various eminent authors. You may have read Spenser's 'Faerie Queen', but Spenser's account of the origin of his Fairies is mere invention, bearing some slight and distant analogy to the tales of the origin of the inhabitants of Jinnestan, as narrated by the Orientals. According to his usual practise, Spenser mixes up his subject with the fables of antiquity. Sir Walter Scott remarks with justice (though his memory played him somewhat false on the occasion), that "the stealing of the Red Cross Knight while a child is the only incident in the poem which approaches to the popular character of the Fairy." But the stealing of Arthegal, "Whyles yet in infant cradle he did crall," is a precisely parallel one. 
Robert Southey tells: "There is a fountain in the forest called the Fountain of the Fairies. When a child, with most delightful wonder, I have heard tales of the elfin tribe, that on its banks hold midnight revelry. An ancient oak, the goodliest in the forest, grows beside; it even has been deem'd their fav'rite tree. They love to lie and rock leaves, and bask them in the sunshine.....The strange and fearful pleasure that fill'd me by that solitary spring ceased not in riper years; and now it woke deeper delight, and more mysterious awe. 

Milton says: 
"Oft fairy elves, 
Whose midnight revels by a forest side, Or fountain, some belated peasant sees, Or dreams he sees, while o'erhead the moon Sits arbitress, and near to the earth 
Wheels her pale course, they on their mirth and dance Intent, with jocund music charm his ear; 
at once with joy and fear his heart rebounds." 
Pope tells us that: 
"About this spring, if ancient fame say true, The dapper elves their moonlight sports renew; Their pigmy king and little fairy queen, In circling dances gamboll'd on the green, While tuneful sprites a merry concert made, And airy music warbled through the shade. 
Dryden speaks of: 
"days of old.....(when) the king of elves and little fairy queen gamboll'd on heaths, and danced on every green." 
Kingsley has a different, and beautiful, fancy when he says: 
"Wherever is love and loyalty, great purposes and lofty souls, even though in a hovel or a mine, there is Fairy-land." 
And, finally, Carrington wails: 
"They are flown, 
Beautiful fictions of our fathers, wove 
In superstition's web when Time was young, And fondly loved and cheris'd they are flown, Before the wand of science!" 
But are they really flown? No! And they never will fly so long as there are simple, pure-minded folks that live close to Nature and see some of its hidden Truths with eyes that are not dimmed with the false mist of 'intellect'. Those little nature-spirits do not "fly" from 'Science', for they are not where the cold-blooded, stony-hearted, dry-as-dust average 'Scientist' reigns amongst his bottles of chemicals, 
test-tubes, and other paraphernalia of his 'craft'; and should at any time he stray into such rural retreats where the fairy hills and mountains, dells, groves, meadows and glens still survive, he will be too blind to see the little elves or gnomes, and there will be no need for them to fly. We know literally hundreds of quite modern books by fine writers, and they tell about the fairies as they are, either because these authors have the 'sight', or their minds are in attunement with the finer realms of nature. There is no need to describe in these lectures the various nature-spirits of different countries; this would also be impossible since we have no room for full descriptions. In Japan alone, for instance, the 'Kami', or gods of nature (which include fairies of all sorts) consist of the Kami of Thunder, of lightning, of fire, rain, springs, mountains, rivers, food, rice, vegetation; the Kami of the highway, the stones, the wind; the Kami of life; the Kami of the hearthside; the Kami in a word, the that explain the origin of geographical names Japanese sets up Kami everywhere. The collection of these spirits forms a huge pantheon of eight hundred myriads of Kami! 
Man's earliest religious history is also the history of his communion with the realms of spiritual existence, and with the elemental beings on various 'Planes'. To effect this communion the human organism must be adapted to the perception of such entities, or else means must be found to promote this adaptation. The arts by which this communion is procured through prepared conditions of the inner self, should be designated 'Magic', and whether these arts be practised for good or evil purposes, their methods must involve a knowledge of the Occult Forces existing in Nature, and the means of becoming attuned to them and their vibrations, so that we shall be able to see them. Magic may be termed the science of Spiritism (not Spiritualism, of course), and whilst it would be as idle to tender it to the acceptance of those whose natural endowments supply them with the art it teaches, as to paint the cheek of the rose, or bleach the lily white, its careful study may furnish one with a clue to the better understanding and use as well as guidance of natural gifts, and where these are lacking, instruct one in the methods of supplying the deficiency. It is for this reason, naturally, that your Hidden Masters have given you the various exercises and meditations, which must if practised regularly develop the latent gifts of seer-ship every human being possesses. Thus you have had exercises to develop the power of seeing, the faculty of hearing, and these open up two of the principal avenues of higher Intelligence to our minds; and in like manner the spiritual senses of smell, taste and touch can be operated upon. Through one or another of these gates to the inner consciousness, all phenomena can be approached and realised, though these phenomena vary with every one. Sometimes the Higher Mind of Man looks forth through its material encasements, acting from within, and sees, hears, tastes, smells and touches spiritual entities of different kinds. Sometimes ministering 'spirits' produce effects, acting from without upon the inner sense of man. Sometimes the influx of spiritual ideas is so silent, natural and unmarked by physical disturbances, that their subject knows not that an Angel speaks, or that the Higher Mind has transcended the laws of sens- uous perception, and derived ideas subconsciously from its near proximity to the realms of spiritual entities. We can note this in the case of an inspired poet, composer of music or a painter who as was the case with the produces pictures without any models famous French artist Gustave Doré. No one can look at his drawings without sensing that here true spiritual vision is at work; whether the artist knew it or not. 
We should cultivate a constant awareness that we are always in close touch with the realms of the spirit, that their evolved inhabitants are very close to us at all times; in fact, they are all around which includes and about us (though the lower evolved entities the lower evolved human spirits cannot be consciously aware of us), and we dwell within those realms without being aware of it too.....unless we can attune, and then we know, and all guesswork has come to an end. 
We should always realise that, though spirits of every grade and class swarm within the Universe, ranged in their different spheres and orders, yet that these realms are as close to the Earth as the Soul is to Man's body; and that these spheres interpenetrate every atom of matter on this globe with one spiritual element or another, and again, that the disembodied 'Spirits' of Earth can be in the most direct, natural and harmonious proximity to their still embodied friends, but not in the manner the Spiritualists believe!! It would be impossible to describe the immense multitudes of those beings who crowd the elements, and exist in all grades of semi-spiritual, semi-material bodies, from such progressed, but still rudimentary conditions as almost impinge upon the perfection of humanhood, down to 'pigmies', who emerge from rude, almost inorganic life, evolved from minerals, plants, water, earth, air and fire. There are luxuriant and enormous growths of such beings, gigantic forms, far exceeding the proportions of humanity, who abound in forests, mountains, hills and desert places; stunted, dwarfish beings who frequent mines, caverns and the deep recesses of the Earth, corresponding to the undeveloped elements of inorganic nature. 
Beautiful, though still embryonic existences there are, who belong to the finer spheres, corresponding to flowers and air. Fantastic and diffuse shapes of elementary life crowd the waters, and resplendent, globular unparticled essences exist, and can be detected in the realms of light and heat represented by fire. All possess different functions, exert power in the particular elements or substances to which they belong, are neither good nor evil per se, but malignant or beneficent in part to those whom they dislike or affect. They possess, in short, varied powers and characteristics, and communion with them has been termed 'Sub-Mundane Spiritism'. 
Myriads upon myriads there are in whom special animal instincts prevail, giving to their embryonic forms a similarity to the creatures to whose natures they correspond. These elementary spirits or fairies are all ranged and classed in the divine order of creation, under the same law of adaptation that is manifest in the plants, animals and other products of different countries and climes. And this is the reason for the great differences in the concepts of the denizens of the Astral Worlds as a whole, apart from fairies, such as the different gods of the nations, the many types of Spirits, Angels and so forth, all differing in degrees similar to the inhabitants, fauna, flora and other things. 
A Scandinavian Seer could never see in his country those Spirits which an Arabian, Indian or African Seer would behold, each in their own districts. And even if they should visit distant lands, it is quite possible that their 'Visions' would cease, the reason being that they might not be able to attune with the entirely new sets of spiritual vibrations surrounding them on all sides. Every spiritual creature is as much in its place, and an inhabitant of its appropriate sphere, as is the material particle to which it corresponds. For this is in accordance with God's plan, unless the philosophic minds of all the great Seers and Sages, who have gathered up the accumulated Wisdom of all ages, and studied nature and the mysteries of spiritual existence in their profoundest depths, have learned less than modern theorists of Science. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
