SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 10. 

Dear Disciple, 
Ancient religion and Philosophy have always understood the parts played by the Great Beings and Principles that rule the Universe, the Kosmos and the World. When we are told by the Roman Catholic Church that Anna, the Mother of the Virgin Mary has also given birth to the latter in an immaculate way ("Mary conceived without sin"), we know that this is derived from the Chaldean Ana, Heaven or Astral light, Anima Mundi; whence Anaita, Devi-Durg훮, the wife of Shiva, is also called Annapurna, and Kanya, the Virgin; Uma-Kanya being her esoteric name, and meaning the 'Virgin of Light', Astral Light in one of its multitudinous aspects. 
The Devas, Pitris, Rishis; the Suras and Asuras; the Daityas and Adityas; the Danavas and Gandharvas, and so on and so forth, all have their various synonyms too in the Ancient Doctrines, as well as in the Kabalah and Hebrew Angelology. Many of these may be found in the Christian Hierarchy of Divine and celestial Powers. All these Thrones and Dominions, Virtues and Principalities, Cherubs, Seraphs and Demons, the various denizens of the Sidereal World, are the modern copies of the archaic prototypes. In the Sepher Yetzirah it is stated that: "God engraved in the Holy Four the Throne of His Glory, the Auphanim (the Wheels or World-Spheres), the Seraphim and Sacred Animals, as Ministering Angels, and from these (Air, Water and Fire or Ether) he formed his habitation." 
In the ninth and tenth sections of the same Teaching it is written: "Ten numbers with what? One: the Spirit of the living God....who liveth in eternities. Voice and Spirit and Word, and this is the Holy Spirit. Two: Air out of Spirit. He designed and hewed therewith twenty-two letters of foundation, three mothers and seven double and twelve single, and one Spirit out of them. Three: Water out of Spirit; he designed and hewed with them the barren and the void, mud and earth. He designed them as a flower-bed, hewed them as a valley, covered them as a paving. Four: Fire out of Water. He designed and hewed therewith the throne of glory and the wheels, and the seraphim and the holy animals as ministering angels, and of the three He founded His dwelling as it is said, He makes his angels Spirits, and his servants fiery flames!" 
The above is a meditation exercise for you. 
The words 'founded His dwelling' show clearly that in the Kabalah, as in India, the Deity was considered as the Universe, and was not, in his origin, the extra-cosmic God he now is. Thus was the world made "through Three Seraphim -- Sepher, Saphar and Sipur" or "through Number, Numbers and Numbered." With the astronomical key, the 'Sacred Animals' become the signs of the Zodiac. 
Of all the great divisions of Dhyan Chohans, or Devas, there is none with which humanity is more concerned than with the 'Kum훮ras'; to use the Aryan term. These can be either of the three following: 
 
(a). The Four Great Beings forming the highest in the Occult Hierarchy who help on the evolution of humanity.
(b). One of the seven divisions of the Devas; 
(c). The 'Lords of the Flame', the 'Sons of Fire', etc., or those who have cosmic self-consciousness within the highest Spiritual Planes. 
Imprudent are the Christian Theologians who have degraded them into 'Fallen' Angels, and now call them Satan and Demons; for among these heavenly denizens who "refused to create", the Archangel Michael, the greatest patron Saint of the Western and Eastern Churches, under his double name of St. Michael and his supposed copy on Earth, St. George conquering the Dragon, has to be given one of the most prominent places! 
The Kum훮ras, the Mind-born Sons of Brahma-Rudra, or Shiva, mystically the howling and terrific destroyer of human passions and physical senses, which are ever in the way of the development of the higher spiritual perceptions and the growth of the inner eternal man, are the progeny of Shiva, the Mahayogi, the great Patron of all the Yogis and Mystics of India. To live as a conscious entity in Eternity, the passions and senses of man must die before his body does. That "to live is to die and to die is to live," has been too little understood in the West. Shiva, the Destroyer, is the Creator and the Saviour of spiritual Man, and he is called the Good Gardener of Nature. He weeds out the plants, and kills the passions of the physical, to call to life the perceptions of the spiritual man. 

There exists in Nature a triple evolutionary scheme for the formation of the three periodical (what are called) Upadhis. This is a Sanskrit term, meaning: 'that which disguises'. It is the outermost expression of the Spirit, the life, or the consciousness; the vehicle through which these manifest, and by which they are limited. Upadhi means something which conditions or puts limitations on another 
thing, which, before, was un-conditioned, and free from limitations of that kind. We might say that there are rather three separate schemes of evolution, which in our Solar System are inextricably interwoven and interblended at every point. These are the Monadic (or Spiritual), the Intellectual and the Physical Evolutions. These three are the finite aspects, or the reflections on the field of Cosmic Illusion, of Spirit - the Breath of Life. These aspects are then: 
1. The Monadic, as the name implies, which is concerned with the growth and development into still higher phases of activity of the Monads, in conjunction with: 
2. The Intellectual, represented by the Solar Devas, the "givers of intelligence and consciousness" to man, and: 
3. The Physical, represented by the Lunar Pitris, round which Nature has concreted the present physical body. 
Each of these three systems has its own laws, and is ruled and guided by different sets of the highest Devas or Logoi. Each is represented in the constitution of Man; and it is the union of these three streams in him which makes him the complex being he now is. 
Nature, the physical evolutionary Power, could never evolve Intelligence unaided; she can only create "senseless forms". The Lunar Monads cannot progress, for they have not yet had sufficient touch with the forms created by 'Nature' to allow of their accumulating experiences through its means. It is the Devas of the mental world who fill up the gap, and they represent the evolutionary power of Intelligence and Higher Mind, the link between Spirit and Matter.....in our present Round. And at the head of all the 'Sons of Ad', of the 'Fire-Mist', etc., there stands a wondrous Being, called the 'Initiator', after whom come groups of semi-divine, and semi-human Beings. These are those who have been "set apart" for certain purposes, and they are the ones in whom are said to have incarnated the highest Angels..... "Munis and Rishis from previous Manvantaras" -- to form the nursery for future human Adepts, on this Earth and during the present Cycle. The 'Being' just referred to, who must remain nameless, is the Tree from which all the great historically known Sages and Hierophants, such as the Rishi Kapila, Hermes, Enoch, Orpheus and many unknown ones, have branched off. As objective man, he is the mysterious (to the profane; the ever invisible, yet ever present) Personage about whom all sorts of Legends are rife in the East, especially among the Occultists and students of the Sacred Science. It 
is He who changes form, yet remains ever the same, and it is He, again, who holds spiritual sway over the initiated Adepts throughout the whole world. He is the 'Nameless One' who has so many names, and yet whose names and whose very nature are unknown. He is the Initiator, called the 'Great Sacrifice'. For, sitting at the Threshold of Light, he looks into it from within the Circle of Darkness, which he will not cross; nor will he quit his post till the last day of this Life-Cycle. There he waits, because in his sublime Love and Compassion he would fain show the way to that region of freedom and light, from which he is a voluntary exile himself, to every prisoner who has succeeded in liberating himself from the bonds of flesh and illusion. Because, in short, he has sacrificed himself for the sake of Mankind, though but a few of the Elect may profit by that great sacrifice. 
It was under the direct, silent guidance of this Master-Teacher that all the other less divine teachers and instructors of mankind became, from the first awakening of human consciousness, the Guides of early humanity. It is through these 'Sons of God' that infant humanity learned its first notions of all the arts and sciences, as well as of spiritual knowledge; and it is they who laid the first foundation- stones of these ancient civilisations that so sorely puzzle our modern generations of students and scholars. 
You will understand that this applies to all classes of Devas, even all those high Celestial Beings whom Occult Teaching calls Manasvin, the Wise, foremost of all, and who would have made all men the self- conscious spiritually intellectual Beings they will be some time, had they not been 'cursed' to fall into generation, and to be reborn themselves as mortals for their 'neglect' of duty. 
There are at present five Elements known to humankind, and each element, including, the Beings within it, has to do with one of the five senses of man. The following order on parallel lines may be found in the evolution of the Elements and Senses; or in Cosmic Terrestrial 'Man' or 'Spirit', and mortal, physical man: 
1. Ether ... Hearing ... Sound.
2. Air...Touch ...Sound and Touch.
3. Fire, or Light....Sight . . . Sound, Touch and Colour. 
4. Water ... Taste...Sound, Touch, Colour and Taste. 
5. Earth ... Smell ... Sound, Touch, Colour, Taste and Smell. 

Each Element adds to its own characteristics those of its predecessor; as each Root-Race adds the characterising sense of the preceding Race. The same is true in the Septenary 'Creation' of man, who evolves gradually in seven stages, and on the same principles. Thus, while Gods or Devas proceed from the First Cause, mankind emanates from these active agents in Kosmos. The Lemuro-Atlanteans were the first to have a Dynasty of Spirit-Kings, or Devas, actual living Devas, or Demi-Gods, or Angels, who had assumed bodies to rule over this race. They were compelled to incarnate at some time as soon as they had descended to the Four lowest Divine Astral Planes, for the the Hidden only way back to the Source, the Essence of the Father Logos (not the Supreme Deity as yet) - was by way of the human chain of many lives, for the Unit of the Essence (in their case) had to become multiple, after differentiation and manifestation. Typhon, the Egyptian Python, the Titans, the Suras and Asuras, all belong to these Spirits that 'peopled' the Earth. They are not "Demons commissioned to create and organise this invisible Universe," but the 'Architects' and the Progenitors of Man. They are 'Fallen' Angels only metaphorically, and they are the 'true Mirrors' of the Eternal Wisdom. Before they appeared on Earth there had been already a period of about 300,000,000 years of vegetable life, and the Zoological relics found in the Laurentian, Cambrian, and Silurian systems, so called, are the relics of the Third Round. At first Astral like the rest, they consolidated and materialised pari passu (hand in hand) with the new vegetation. We shall go more deeply into these things later on. 
A Brahm훮na receives his secret name at birth from the family Astrologer, who is supposed to have received it from the Devas (he is thus said to be initiated by the Devas), and a Hindu will sooner die than reveal this name. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
