SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER
Grade 3. Number 14. 

Dear Disciple,  
While you are doing the meditations on the Solar Plexus passing them by after what we said about this centre in our previous lecture we will now add another exercise that will tone up your system in a definite manner. 
Lie down comfortably on a bed or divan, completely relaxed, and make your mind a complete blank. Then concentrate all your thought on your feet. Visualise them within and without, and try to picture to yourself every bone, sinew and muscle within them. After a short time you will note that your feet begin to tingle; when that happens pass on your thoughts to your ankles. The tingling is caused by the blood rushing to the place upon which you are concentrating, thus refreshing it and toning it up in a very decided manner. After the ankles begin to feel 'alive', pass upwards to the calves, the knees, the thighs, then to the hips - outwardly; then to the stomach, the heart, the lungs, the upper part of the chest and the shoulders. Miss the navel region with the Solar Plexus completely. This is the reason why we advise you to pass on outwards from thighs to stomach. After the shoulders, start on the fingertips, hands, wrists, arms, up to the shoulders; thence to the neck and throat ever visualising them in full detail as far as you can then the jaws, tongue, gums, ears, eyes, forehead, brain and the back of the head, until you reach the top of the skull and allow your forces of concentration to pass out through it in an upward direction as soon as you feel the same tingling, or when your inner mind tells you to do so. You can do this exercise when retiring for the night; but do not be surprised if you fall into a healthy and sound sleep before you are halfway through! You can also do this exercise when you are sitting in a bus, tube or train, or anywhere else when you have the chance. You cannot do it too often, and it will never harm you in any way! 
You can make the effects still more stimulating if you take a deep breath and hold it as long as you can with each section of the body upon which you are concentrating. After slowly exhaling, take several normal breaths before you hold the breath again. This is important, for if you hold your breath several consecutive times you slow down the heart action too much, and it might also affect the lungs to an undesirable extent. Please do not forget this.....for your own sake. We know of several cases where people have injured their lungs rather severely by indulging in so-called 'Yogi' breathing without a teacher to supervise these dangerous practises. Our advice is that you leave all such things severely alone, or else write to us first, so that we can tell you what to do and what not. It is the same with the exercise we commenced this lecture with. We know of more than one Order that gives it to its students; but they all fail to advise the passing by of the centre part of the lower body where the danger lies!! Once you have mastered the technique of this and it is quite simple, really exercise, you can then concentrate on any part of the body (except the same centre zone) where there may be a feeling of slight pain at times, or of temporary discomfort. You will always note that such a place begins to throb, caused by the blood rushing towards and through it at your mental command (by just concentrating your thoughts upon it) and this has a clearing-up and healing effect. But it is useless in cases of toothache, earache or any other severe pain. In such cases you should see a doctor or dentist, as the case may be. A great deal of harm can be done by those good souls who believe that they can cure themselves by 'willpower'. This may be possible up to a point, but we never advise such foolish things to our students. 

The next Element to consider will be Water. This is the Third Element of Creation, and it emanated from Air, the Second. In the Purānas it is written; "Elohim said: Let there be a firmament, in the midst of waters. Come, see! At the time that the Holy.....created the World, he (They, rather) created 7 Heavens Above. He created 7 Earths Below, 7 Seas, 7 days, 7 rivers, 7 weeks, 7 years, 7 times.....So there are 7 Earths Below, they are all inhabited.....And.....between each Earth, a heaven (firmament) is spread out between each other...And there are in them (these Earths) creatures who look different one from the other;... but if you object and say that all the children of the world came out from Adam, it is not so....And the lower Earths, where do they come from? They are from the Chain of the Earth, and from the Heaven above." 
The words 'Waters' and 'Water', so often used in the ancient Scriptures, stand as the symbol for 'Akasha', the "Primordial Ocean of Space", on which the self-born Spirit moves, reclining on that which is its progeny. That Spirit is called Nārāyana, by the ancient Aryans; and in the Linga, Vayu and Markandaya Purānas it is written: "Water is the body of Nara; thus we have heard the name of Water explained. Since Brahma rests on the Water, therefore He is termed Nārāyana". "Pure, Purusha created the Waters pure". At the same time Water is the Third Principle in material Kosmos, and the Third in the Realm of the Spiritual; Spirit of Fire, Flame, Akasha, Ether, Water, Air, Earth are the cosmic, sidereal, psychic, Spiritual and mystic principles, pre- eminently Occult, on every plane of Being. 
"Gods, Demons, Pitris and Men", are the four orders of beings to whom the term 'Ambhamsi' is applied, because they are all the product of Waters (mystically) of the Akashic Ocean, and of the Third Principle in Nature. In the Vedas it is a synonym of Gods. Pitris and Men on Earth are the transformations or rebirths of Gods and Demons (Spirits) on a Higher Plane. 
Water is, in another sense, also the feminine principle. Venus Aphrodite is the personified Sea, and the Mother of the God of Love, the Generatrix of all the Gods, as much as the Christian Virgin Mary is Mare, the Sea, the Mother of the Western God of Love, Mercy and Charity. So we see that, allegorically and symbolically as well as actually, an Element has the same two-fold Character of positive and negative, or male and female, as everything else; and this is as it should be logically, and also in accord with the great Eternal Laws. 
And the Adoption by the Latin Church of such symbols as Water, Fire, Sun, Moon and Stars, as well as many others, is simply a continuation by the early Christians of the old worship of Pagan nations. In the same manner, Odin obtained his power, knowledge and wisdom, by sitting at the feet of Mimir, the thrice-wise Jotun, who passed his life by the fountain of primeval Wisdom, the crystalline Waters of which increased his knowledge daily. "Mimir drew the highest knowledge from the fountain, because the World was born of Water; hence primeval Wisdom was to be found in that mysterious Element", as it is stated in Wagner and McDowall's 'Asgard and the Gods'. Loki, the Fire-God, is said to have hidden in the Water, as well as in the Moon, the light-giver, whose reflection he found therein. This belief that the Fire finds refuge in the Water was not limited to the old Scandinavians. It was shared by all nations and was finally adopted by the early Christians, who symbolised the Holy Ghost under the shape of Fire, "cloven tongues like as of fire" the Breath of the Father-Son. This Fire descends also into the Water, or the Sea - Mare, Mary. The Dove was the symbol of the Soul with several nations, was sacred to Venus, the Goddess born from sea-foam, and it became later the symbol of the Christian Anima Mundi; or Holy Spirit. 

The God of every nation, from the Vedic Vishvakarman down to the present 'civilised' nations, was always 'the Word', who was in the 'Beginning', or, in other words, at the re-awakening of the energising Powers of Nature. Born of Fire and Water, before these became distinct Elements, IT was the 'Maker', Modeller or Fashioner of all manifested things and beings. "Without Him was not anything made that was made. In Him was life; and the life was the light of men." He was "The Great Dragon of Wisdom.....born of Fire and Water, and into Fire and Water will all be re-absorbed with him", as it says in the Fa- hwa-King. This is the great one who may "assume any form he pleases", from the beginning of a Manvantara to its end; he will appear as the last of the Avataras in the Seventh Race, as is universally believed in the East. 
In the Rig Vedic Hymns it is stated allegorically that the human Race has sprung from Fire and Water, and the Seven Rays of the Sun are made parallel to the Seven Worlds of every Planetary Chain to the Seven Rivers of Heaven and of Earth, the former being the Seven Creative Hosts, and the latter the seven primitive human groups. In the Chaldean legend of Berosus, Oannes, or Dagon, the man-fish, instructing the people, shows that the infant world is created out of water, and that all beings originate from this Prima Materia. In the 'Ordinances of Manu', the 'sky' is "the perpetual place of Waters". Another teaching tells us the origin of Water, its admixture with Fire "Liquid Fire" as it says and enters upon an alchemical description of the progeny of the two, namely; solid matters, such as earth and minerals. From the "Waters of Space", the progeny of the male Spirit-Fire and the female (gaseous) Water has become the oceanic expanse of Earth. This is based on a strictly scientific foundation. Water is the symbol of the female element everywhere, and Mater (Mother), from which comes the letter M, is derived pictorially from the Egyptian water hieroglyph. It is the universal Matrix or the "Great Deep". 

In Alchemy "Mercury" is the "radical Moyst Principle," Primitive or Elementary Water, containing the Seed of the Universe, fecundated by the Solar Fires. And in the Egyptian Cosmogony, the opening sentences show Hathor, or Mother Night, representing Illimitable Darkness, as the principal Element which covered the Infinite Abyss, animated by Water and the Universal Spirit of the Eternal, dwelling alone in Chaos. And finally, in the real Jewish Scripture (not the current or accepted Bible), the history of the creation opens with the Spirit of God and His creative Emanation another Deity! Thus we arrive at the true nature of the Element of Water, it is the Mother-Element. That homogeneous primordial Element is simple and single on the terrestrial plane of consciousness and sensation only, since Matter, after all, is nothing more than the sequence of our own states of consciousness, while Spirit is only an idea of psychic intuition. But even on the next higher plane, that simple Element which is defined on our Earth by current science as the ultimate undecomposable constituent of some kind of Matter, would be pronounced in the world of a higher spiritual perception to be something very complex indeed; in spite of the intense studies of which water has been the subject (we referred briefly to it in Grade 1), and in spite of what has been discovered about its various and manifold properties (density, pressures, viscosity, tensions, temperatures, electrical conductivity, as a catalyzer and so on), our purest water would be found to yield, instead of its two simple elements of Hydrogen and Oxygen, many other constituents, undreamt of by our modern terrestrial scientists. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
