SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 11. 

Dear Disciple, 

Whereas Science may regard 'force' as generated by Matter, and call this force, or rather such forces, as "modes of its motion", the Occult Teachings see in these effects of Matter the Elementals, or Elemental Forces, produced by the Devas, Architects and Builders of the Kosmos. The intimate connection of these Elementals (guided by the unerring hands of the Rulers) with the elements of pure Matter, results in our terrestrial phenomena, such as light, heat, magnetism and so on. But we must not fall into the error of calling every force or every energy an 'entity', for this would be the same as calling the noise of an engine an entity, thus confusing it with its engineer who directs and controls it. But the 'engineers' of the Cosmic Planes we do call Entities of various ranks and degrees. The Elementals, or Nature-Forces, are the acting, though quite invisible secondary causes, and in themselves they are but the effects of primary causes behind the veil of terrestrial phenomena. Behind them all stands the higher and noumenal cause, the Intelligence, from whose Essence radiate these states of Matter, generating the countless milliards of Elementals, or Psychic Nature Spirits. 
Metaphysically there is but One Element in Nature, and the Root of it is the Supreme Deity, from whom evolve the Seven Elements, of which only five are known, so far, the other two due to manifest in the Sixth and Seventh Races, bringing in their train hosts of further Elemental Forces of a new order, and with them will come new perceptions in man and new attributes such as cannot be even guessed at as yet. 
Force in Matter is certainly not an inherent quality of it; to endow Matter — of which in reality nothing is yet known with an inherent quality called Force, of the nature of which still less is known, would be to create a far more serious difficulty than that which lies in the acceptance of the intervention of our Elementals (under guidance) in every natural phenomenon. 
The Occultists, who, if they would express themselves correctly, do not say that Matter as we know it on Earth, but only the substance or essence of Matter is indestructible and eternal, assert that all the so-called Forces of Nature, electricity, light, heat etc., far from being modes of motion of material particles, are in their ultimate constitution the differentiated aspects of that Universal Motion which we have discussed before. 
Some of the Nature Spirits appear in the form of what are commonly called Fairies, which is at the same time one of the most beautiful and important Mythological conceptions. The belief in Fairies is very ancient and widespread, and during the earlier part of the last century there was an important revival of this belief on account of the clairvoyant perception of those little Elementals by various persons, and many of you will have heard of Conan Doyle's interesting book on 'The Coming of the Fairies' published in 1922. We understand that this was re-printed by the University of Nebraska Press in 2006. The Seer and Mystic, Geoffrey Hodson (1886-1983), whom we mentioned in our last but one Lecture (Number 9), also wrote several books on Fairies in which full descriptions appear of these quaint folks, and here again we recommend two of his books, entitled 'Fairies at Work and at Play' (1924) and 'The Kingdom of Færie' (1927). In addition to these books, Hodson's 'The Kingdom of the Gods' (1952), which we mentioned in Lecture Number 9, contains many illustrations of the Higher Devas, painted under the author's supervision by Ethelwynne M. Quail. All three books have been re- printed at different times and should not be too difficult or expensive to obtain. The same ideas concerning Fairies are to be found among rude and uncultivated Races as in the poesy of more civilised peoples. There are numbers of British Fairies of several distinct kinds, differing considerably in their characteristics; in fact, they vary in every country. Whereas, for instance, the Irish 'good people' and the British 'pixies' are of a benevolent but capricious and mischievous disposition, those of Scotland are of a more sombre cast; and in Highland Scotland, where they are called "men of peace", it is believed that every year the devil carries off a tenth part of them! Although fairy legends are to be found all over Europe, varying a little with the locality, these tales are identical in their essential points. 
The belief in fairies has been confused with Animism, which is also believed by some to be at the basis of religious belief. But it is quite a different thing when a savage thinks he can hear voices calling to him in the wind, or sees movements in trees, streams etc., which he believes to be inhabited by spirits who cause those movements, and when a true Seer beholds the Beings that inhabit other Spheres, manifesting on a rate of vibration different from that of our Earth Plane. 
To dismiss fairies, demons, Angels and so on as the mere ignorant imaginings of the savage, whose most ordinary events of everyday life do not admit of a rational solution, his whole existence being bound up, from birth to death, by a network of miracles, and regulated in its smallest details by unseen 'powers' of whom he knows little or nothing; and to compare this with the sublime visions of Enoch, Ezekiel, Hermes and others, cannot be called a very intelligent process of reasoning; no matter how 'well-educated' the propounder of such dogmatic statements may be. There is more in these beliefs than is at first discernible. It has been argued that there are three principal reasons for humanity's belief in the 'supernatural'. The first of these is the apparent incapacity of the majority of mankind to accept a purely monotheistic creed. And no sooner has any person or group succeeded in setting up monotheism in place of the general belief in a multitude of gods of all kinds, than reaction sets in. The more 'educated' parts of the community maintain allegiance to the new teaching-perhaps - but the lower classes soon amalgamate it with some form of polytheism, more or less pronounced, either secret or declared. Even the Jews, the nation the most conspicuous for its supposed uncompromising adherence to a monotheistic creed, soon followed 'after strange gods', not only in places removed from the centre of worship, but even some of their most notable worthies were liable to the same accusation. This applies also to the Roman Catholic Church with its hosts of Hierarchies of inferior deities, saints, angels and so on, and to the Protestant Church as well, as George Eliot, with her usual penetration noted in 'Silas Marner', where in Mrs. Winthrop's simple theological system, the Trinity is always referred to as "Them"! 
The second principle is that of the Manichæists: the division of spirits into hostile camps, good and evil. This is a much more common belief (with those who 'believe' anything at all these days) than the orthodox are willing to allow. But monodiabolism is as impossible to establish with the majority as monotheism. 
The third of these principles is the tendency of all theological systems to absorb in themselves the deities extraneous to themselves, not as gods, but as inferior, or even evil, spirits. The actual existence of the foreign deity is not for a moment disputed, the presumption in favour of innumerable spiritual agencies being far too strong to allow the possibility of such a doubt; but just as the alien is looked upon as an inferior being, created chiefly for the use of the chosen people — and what nation is not, if its opinion of itself may be relied upon, a chosen people? - So the god the alien worships is a spirit of inferior power and capacity, and can be recognised solely as occupying a position subordinate to that of the gods of the land. 
Thus we find classifications of devils of greater and lesser powers, good and bad angels, the Catholic belief in the devil's power to create bodies who like to appear in the shapes of priest and parsons, quoting the Scriptures; the Reformers who denied the possibility of 'ghosts', and said that the appearances so called were all devils; possession and obsession; the seven devils of Elizabethan times, who were called: "Pride, Covetousness, Luxury, Envy, Wrath, Gluttony and Sloth"; witchcraft and witches as described by Shakespeare, Scott and Harsnet; Norns; raising mists; toad-omens; ship-sinkings; sieve-sailings; mooncalves; incubi and succubi and so on and so forth. 
But there is a deep instinct within man that tells him- unless his thinking-apparatus has been clogged with material precepts and dogmas that these nature spirits do exist somehow, and that there are Forces and Beings around us in the Universe which the ordinary senses cannot perceive. 
Whether we believe that 'fairies' are in reality a class of devils who exercise their powers in a manner less terrible and revolting than that depicted by theologians, and that the attributes and functions possessed by both fairy and devil are similar in kind, although differing in degree; or that the fairies are probably the descendants of the lesser local deities, as devils were of the more important Heathen Gods that were overturned by the advancing wave of Christianity, although in the course of time this distinction was obliterated and forgotten; and that the fairies have powers which in their essence are similar to those exercised by devils, notably that of appearing in diverse shapes: the fact remains that fairies, elves, dwarfs, nisses, necks, merman and mermaids, Kobolds, nixes, gnomes, imps and what not have been and are believed in by every known and unknown Race, Nation, Tribe or Clan under the Sun. 
Like every other word in extensive use, whose derivation is not historically certain, the word Fairy has obtained various and opposite etymons. Meyric Casaubon, and those who like him deduce everything from a classic source, however unlikely, derive 'fairy' from the Greek word 'pheres', which Hesychius interprets 'Centaurs'; or think that fée, whence fairy, is the last syllable of 'nympha'. Sir W. Ousely derives it from the Hebrew 'pheër', beauty, others from 'Feres', companions etc., etc. But no theory is so plausible, or is supported by such names, as that which deduces the English 'Fairy' from the Persian 'Peri'. All the foregoing etymologies, be it observed, are the conjectures of English Scholars, for English is the only language in which the name of the individual, Fairy, has the canine letter to afford any foundation for them. But the simplest solution of the problem in the present case, as in most others, seems to be the true one. The Parcæ of antiquity were also called Fatæ - (we meet on a coin of Dioclesian, Fatis victricibus) and the connection between the Parcæ and the Fairies of Romance will be evident to any one who recollects how frequently the latter were attendant at the birth of heroes and princesses, foretelling their fortunes, or bestowing their good or evil gifts upon them. Or, if this should not please, the wife of Faunus, a rural deity, was named Fatua, as we are informed by Macrobius and Lactantius; and the nymphs, Donatus says, were from her called Fatuæ. Which of these is the true etymon we do not undertake to decide. The first connects itself with the Fairy-ladies of Romance; the other with the popular Elves, the tenants of the forest and groves. As it was to the former that the word Feé or Fairy was originally applied, we prefer the first. 
Among all nations the admixture of joy and pain, of exquisite delight and intense misery in the present state, has led the imagination as well as the inspiration to the conception of regions of unmixed bliss destined for the repose of the good after the toils of this life, and of climes where happiness prevails, the abode of beings superior to man. The Hindu paints his Swergas as "profuse of bliss", and all the joys are collected in the Paradise of the Mohammedan. The Persian lavished the riches of his fancy in raising the Cities of Jewels and of Amber that adorn the realms of Jinnestan; the romancer erected castles and palaces full of knights and ladies in Avalon and in the land of Færie; while the Hellenic bards, unused to pomp and glare, filled the Elysian Fields and the Island of the Blest with tepid gales and brilliant flowers. 
In Homer, Proteus tells Menelaus that, because he had had the honour of being the son-in-law of Zeus, he would not die in "horse- feeding Argos". 
"But thee the ever-living gods will send Unto the Elysian plain and distant bounds 
Of Earth, where dwells fair-haired Rhadamanthus. There life is easiest unto men; no snow, 
Or wintry storm, or rain, at any time, Is there; but evermore the Ocean sends Soft-breathing airs of Zephyr to refresh The inhabitants." 
This is the classical view of Fairy-land, and we may compare it with Pindar's romantic imagination when he says: 
"They speed their way 
To Kronos' palace, where around The Island of the Blest, the airs 
Of Ocean breathe, and golden flowers Blaze; some on land 
From shining trees, and other kinds 
The water feeds. Of these 
Garlands and bracelets round their arms they bind, 
Beneath the righteous sway 
Of Rhadamanthus." 
Lucretius has transferred these fortunate fields to the superior regions, to form the abode of his fainéans, gods; and Virgil placed them, with additional poetic splendour, in the bosom of the Earth. 
We shall continue this theme in our next lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
