SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 16. 

Dear Disciple, 
In his lecture on Protoplasm, Professor T. H. Huxley once stated that: "In perfect strictness, it is true that the chemical investigations can tell us..... nothing directly of the composition of living matter....it is also in strictness true, that we know nothing about the composition of any (material) body whatever as it is". And the same holds good today, just as Science cannot tell us what Energy is; for any textbook on Physics will tell you that 'Energy' is that which is only known to us by its effects; or similar vague terms such as "Energy is the capacity of a system to do work" will be used. In Ganot's 'Physics', for instance, it says: "the various phenomena which bodies present show that their molecules are under the influence of two contrary forces, one which tends to bring them together, and the other to separate them.....The first force.....is called molecular attraction.....the second force is due to the vis vita, or moving force". 

This is quite correct, but what is the nature of this moving force, or vis vita? "We cannot tell!" is the inevitable reply, and we remind you of another quotation from Huxley (from his 'Physical Basis of Life), when he stated that: "It is an empty shadow of my imagination". 

Schopenhauer, whose bold theories and opinions are often identical to a great extent with those of Esoteric Buddhism, says: "In reality, there is neither matter nor spirit. The tendency to gravitation in a stone is as unexplainable as thought in the human brain....if matter no one knows why fall to the ground, then it can also - no one knows why think....As soon, even in mechanics, as we trespass beyond the purely mathematical, as soon as we reach the inscrutable adhesion, and so on we are faced by phenomena which are to our senses as mysterious as the will and thought in man: we find ourselves facing the incomprehensible, for such is every force in nature. Where is, then that matter which you all pretend to know so well, and from which being so familiar with it - you draw all your conclusions, and attribute to it all things.....that which can be fully realised by our reason and senses is but the superficial; they can never reach the true inner substance of things. Such was the opinion of Kant. If you consider that there is in a human head some sort of a spirit, then you are obliged to concede the same to a stone. If your dead and utterly-passive matter can manifest a tendency toward gravitation, or, like electricity, attract and repel and send out sparks then as well as the brain it can also think. In short, every particle of the so-called spirit we can replace with an equivalent of matter, and every particle of matter replace with spirit..... Thus, it is not the Cartesian division of all things into matter 
and spirit that can ever be found philosophically exact; but only if we divide them into will and manifestation, which form of division has naught to do with the former, for it spiritualises everything: all that which is in the first instance real and objective 
body and matter it transforms into a representation, and every manifestation into Will". (Parerga, 2:3). 

The matter of Science may be for all objective purposes a "dead and utterly-passive matter", but to the Occultist not an atom of it can be dead and, as Eliphas Levi says: "Eternal Life is Motion equilibrated by the alternate manifestations of force". But we should also add to this that perpetual motion is independent of the manifested Forces at work! 
In the East, annihilation in Nirvana refers only to matter; that of the visible as well as of the invisible body, for the Astral body, the personal double, is still matter as you know already: however sublimated it may seem to us on Earth. Buddha taught that the primitive Substance is eternal and unchangeable. Its vehicle is the pure, luminous Ether, the boundless, infinite Space. This is "not a void resulting from the absence of forms, but on the contrary, the foundation of all forms", as Madame Blavatsky states in "The Secret Doctrine'. With this we are in full agreement. 
Matter, as a substance, is eternal and has never been created. Therefore Simon Magus, with all the great Gnostic Teachers and Eastern Philosophers, never speaks of its beginning. Eternal Matter receives its various forms in the lower Worlds from the creative Angels. Why then should not Man, the direct heir of the highest Angel, do the same, by the potency of his thought, which is born from Spirit? This is what the Easterns call "Kriya-Shakti" - the creation of forms by means of thought; hence the power - divine or human- to manifest. The same term stands for the outgoing or self-sacrificing powers of the Self or Ego. It is the power of producing forms on the objective plane through the potency of Ideation and Will, from invisible, indestructible Matter. Does not Jeremiah say, quoting the 'Word of the Lord": "Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out of the womb I sanctified thee", for Jeremiah stands here for Man when he was yet an emanation from the Deity, that which the Gnostics called an "Aeon", or Divine Man, and he agrees here with both Simon Magus and Eastern Philosophy. 
Speusippus and Xenocrates taught, like their great master, Plato, that the Anima Mundi was not the Deity, but a manifestation. Those Philosophers never conceived of the ONE as an animate nature. The Original ONE did not exist, as we understand the term in its general meaning. Not till IT had united with the many emanated existences was a being produced. That manifested 'something' dwells in the centre as in the circumference, but it is only the reflection of the Deity the World Soul. And in this teaching we find the very spirit of the Aryan teachings, for it is that of Esoteric Brahmanism and of the Vedantic Adwaitīs. And Schopenhauer and von Hartmann held the same opinions, while Occult Science states that the psychic and ectenic forces, the ideo-motor and electro-biological powers, latent thought, and even subconscious cerebration theories can be condensed in two words: the Kabalistic 'Astral Light'. 
Schopenhauer only synthesized all this by calling it Will, and contradicted the scientific men of his period in their crass materialistic views, as von Hartmann did later on. He said that no experimenter can have anything to do with matter properly so termed, but only with the forces into which he divides it. He concludes thereby that, that which is now called matter is nothing but the aggregation of atomic forces, to express which the word 'matter' is used; outside of that, for science, matter is but a word devoid of sense. 
There is a definite scale of vibrations connected with each form of living matter, and, conforming to the septenary system, there is a definite musical note for each of the Seven Principles of Man. But we should be careful here, for at present music in general is performed at a certain 'pitch', which is called 'high pitch' and every modern piano, as well as many other instruments, are normally tuned to this pitch (sometimes referred to as 'A440') which makes the note 'A' above middle C vibrate at 440Hz, or 440 vibrations per second. What we need for our purpose is the old 'low pitch', the pitch in which the note ‘A' (of the second string of the violin) or Diapason normal had 435 vibrations per second. It is possible to obtain tuning-forks and pitch-pipes tuned in to this low pitch, should any of our students be interested to experiment with the Laws that follow here. 
 
According to low pitch, then, the note corresponding to the animal body is C; it has the colour Red and the number 1. 
The Spark of Life, or Life-Principle, has the note D; its colour is Orange and its number 2. 
The Higher Mind has the note E (corresponding to the Moon); its colour is yellow and its number is 3. 
The lower Mind has the note F; its colour is Green and its number 4. 
The Aura has the note G; the colour is blue and the number 5. 
The Soul's note is A; its colour is Indigo and its number 6. 
The Astral Body has the note B; its colour is Violet and its number 7. 
The numbers have nothing to do with 'Numerology'; they are only given here in order to indicate the position of each Principle and colour in this Scale. This Musical Scale, according to these numbers, proceeds from the world of gross matter to that of Spirit in the Spiritual Realms. Please note that the 'Aura' departs with the Astral Body etc., at bodily death and remains with it afterwards in the same manner as it did previously while it was connected with the human, earthly body. 
Form is different on different planes, and the forms of one plane may be formless to dwellers on another and are so. The Builders build on Planes in the Divine Mind, visible to them though not to us. The Principle of limitation is Form; this principle is Divine Law manifested in Kosmic Matter, which, in its essence is limitless. 
The first step towards the accomplishment of Kriya-shakti is the use of the imagination. To imagine a thing properly is to firmly create a model of what you desire, perfect in all its details. The Will is then brought into action, and the form is thereby transferred to the objective world. This is creation by Kriya-shakti; in the Inner Work we shall give you some exercises connected with this. 

The Gnostics regarded matter - rightly — as a Veil between the consciousness of Man and the Spirit. And the Ophites and Nazarenes as well as other 'heretics' taught that Sophia, "the Celestial Virgin", is prevailed upon to send Christos, her emanation, to the aid of perishing humanity, from whom Ilda-Baoth (the Jehovah of the Jewish nation) and his six sons of Matter (the lower terrestrial Angels) are shutting out the Divine Light. Therefore, Christos, the perfect Principle that contains in itself the Seed of Avatarism, "uniting himself with Sophia (or Divine Wisdom) descended through the seven planetary regions, assuming in each an analogous form.....(and) entered into the man Jesus at the moment of his baptism in the Jordan. From this time forth Jesus began to work miracles; before that he had been entirely ignorant of his own mission". 
Ilda-Baoth, discovering that Christos was bringing to an end his kingdom of Matter, stirred up the Jews, his own people, against Him, and Jesus was put to death. When Jesus was on the cross Christos and Sophia left His body, and returned to their sphere. The material body of Jesus was abandoned to the earth, but He Himself, the Inner Man, was clothed with a body made up of aether. "Thenceforth He consisted merely of soul and spirit.....During His sojourn upon earth of eighteen months after He had risen, He received from Sophia that perfect knowledge, that true Gnosis, which He communicated to the small portion of the Apostles who were capable of receiving the same". (Charles William King, 'The Gnostics and their Remains', 1887). 
After all our previous studies you should by now be able to correctly interpret this doctrine. In connection with this you should remember that only the negative part of the soul (the Higher Mind) does ever descend into the matter of the body. When a man's Higher Mind reaches out in full and pure desire to the Soul, then there will be that blending of the two Principles, and the 'Holy Spirit' will descend into that man; in other words; a definite and conscious connection is established between the two.....Sophia and Christos! Once that has taken place there can be no further parting between the Two-now ONE- unless the Higher Mind deliberately breaks away again by returning to the lusts and illusions of Matter forsaking Sophia, the Spiritual Wisdom that dwelleth within the Great Light. But if the connection remains unbroken, it is inevitable that the Higher Mind, at 'passing over' leaves the lower realms of Matter for ever, and accompanies the Soul to its own Realm; there is no further need for reincarnation then and no more dwelling in the 'Moon'. 
Symbolically we can express all this by the Triangle with its point upwards and the Triangle with its point downwards. The Divine Self, or the Positive Soul, tends with its point upwards towards the Higher Realms of Spirit; and the Higher Mind of the human Ego gravitates downwards, immersed in Matter, connected with its higher Principles by means of an imaginary bridge, which the Easterns call 'Antahkarana'. It is up to the Higher Mind to cross that bridge from Matter to Spirit in the manner discussed in these Lectures. 
In our objective Universe of Matter and false appearances the Sun is the most fitting emblem of the life-giving beneficent Deity. In the Subjective, boundless World of Spirit and Actuality there is a Higher Sun. 
But remember that with the help of the physical senses alone, none can hope to reach beyond gross Matter. We can do so only in the manner indicated above and by special training, exercises and meditations, and so we shall transcend Matter, and all its seeming Mysteries will become clear to us when we behold it with the eye of Spiritual Knowledge. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
