SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 17. 

Dear Disciple, 
In this lecture we will take another sacred centre for meditation purposes, and this time we will take the one that is situated at the Spleen. It is slightly above the Solar Plexus and slightly to the left side of the body. Before its awakening its main function is the absorption, 'digestion', assimilation and distribution of that which the Easterns call 'Prana', which in reality is Cosmic Life, manifesting on all Planes. As according to Hindu thought, there is but One Life, one consciousness everywhere, the word Prana has been used for the 'Supreme Self', the all-sustaining Breath. Hence, the Life on every Plane may be spoken of as the Prana of the Plane; it becomes the life-breath in every creature. Specifically, it is the third of the seven Principles of Man, the active power producing the vital phenomena. It is also one of the five 'Vital Airs', or life-principles of the body; and there it is said to be located in the breast. The Spleen, however, is the vital receiving and transmitting station in the body. Lowered vitality and nervous debility can be frequently traced to a failure in the functioning of this Chakram. When vivified properly this centre gives the power of free and self-conscious astral travel. It is called the Splenic Chakram, and it is the cause when slightly vivified only - of the half-remembrance of a blissful sensation of flying through the air in dreams. We might add here that the order of the Chakras advised for meditation purposes in these Lectures is quite different from the ones generally recommended. But by commencing with all those that are placed in the centre of the body in the order we give, we follow a definite system, which will produce better effects than any other system in use. The system of naming these sacred centres and manipulating them in all sorts of ways are legion. We shall not waste any time over them, for there are more important things to do. Some systems identify the Chakras with the Plexuses; others hotly deny this to be so. Some state that the Chakras originate in the Spine; others contradict this teaching. In short, there are but few who know the actual truth about these important centres. 

The Splenic Chakram has six petals or undulations, all of different colours, and it is radiant, glowing and like the Sun when fully active for Prana comes to it from the Sun, leaves it again in six horizontal streams, while the seventh Sun-Principle is drawn into the hub of this wheel. Each of the six divisions shows predominantly the colour of one of the forms of the vital Force, namely; red, orange, yellow, green, blue and violet. It is the second sacred centre in the body; the Navel Chakram being the third, and the Heart Chakram the fourth; and the heart centre was the one we commenced with, as you know. 
Now will you please add to your previous meditations on the Heart Chakram that of the Spleen. The Navel, or Solar Plexus Chakram is either meditated upon or not according to our private instructions to each separate student. This should be remembered!! 
We recommend five to ten minutes per day for meditations on the Heart and Spleen each, if the student wishes to develop these centres. This to be carried on until we mention the next centre. A break of at least three hours should occur between the meditations on each separate centre. Never follow on with these meditations from one centre to another without this break. This should also be remembered!!! 
Our next subject is connected with Universal Force; and in this Lecture we will introduce it, carrying the studies further in the Inner Work. Science says that Force is a mode of motion. The basic conception of Force is that afforded by the muscular sense, says Science. Professor L.D. Weld, Professor of Physics at Coe College stated: "We exert muscular force upon objects and thereby produce certain effects; and when we observe similar effects produced by other means, we attribute them to the action of forces, whatever the ultimate nature of those agencies may be. Thus, if a strip of steel is clamped at one end and pulled sideways at the other with the finger, it bends. A magnet placed near it will cause it to bend the same way; and though we may know nothing of the nature of magnetic influence, we say that a force is acting upon the steel spring. Force produces other effects than elastic deformation. Newton's Laws of Dynamics deal primarily with forces, and the first of his Laws points out that force, and force alone, can alter the motion of free bodies. He also recognised that the Earth exerts forces upon all bodies near it, the measure of which is the weight of these bodies. Other examples are magnetic and electric interaction, cohesion, adhesion and chemical affinity. 
"With so many objective manifestations; it becomes necessary to choose a suitable standard measure of force from among them. Elastic deformation and the sustaining of weight are actually used in familiar methods of force measurement, as with the spring balance and certain engineering testing machines. But these methods have the disadvantage of variability with time or place, since springs lose their elasticity and the intensity of gravity varies with latitude and altitude. A plan better adapted to accuracy is to accept Newton's second Law as the definition of the standard measure of force, and to agree that forces are to be considered proportional to the rates at which they cause free bodies to change their motion. 
"This 'inertia measure' gives rise to a system of absolute units of force, recognised by Gauss and sometimes therefore called Gaussian units. Such units, for example, are the dyne and the less used poundal, each of which is defined as the force required to give some specified unit of mass a specified (linear) acceleration." 
Now this all sounds very interesting, but we are not told what force is by any Scientist. We may read all that Science has to say about 'equilibrium of forces', or statics, or consider Kinetics, or the relation of forces to the motions of bodies, or 'the capacity to do work' and so on, but still we cannot discover in this manner what force is. 

It is most remarkable that, while honestly confessing their entire primary ignorance of the true nature of even terrestrial matter substance being regarded more as a dream than as sober reality Physicists should, nevertheless, set themselves up as judges of that matter, and claim to know what it is able and what it is not able to do in various combinations. Scientists know this matter hardly skin-deep, and yet they will dogmatise. It is "a mode of motion" and nothing else! But the "force" that is inherent in a living person's breath, when blowing a speck of dust from the table, is also "a mode of motion". It is as undeniably not a quality of the matter, or the particles of the speck, and it emanates from the living and thinking entity that breathed, whether the impulse originated consciously or unconsciously, and no matter that he used various muscles in order to exhale that breath with a certain amount of 'force'. Indeed, to endow matter something of with an inherent quality called force, which nothing is so far known of the nature of which still less is known, is to create a far more serious difficulty than that which lies in the acceptance of the intervention of our "Nature-Spirits" in every natural phenomenon. All the Forces of Nature, such as electricity, magnetism, light, heat and so on, far from of material particles, being modes of motion- and therefore of force are in their ultimate constitution the differentiated aspects of that Universal Motion which we have discussed before. 

The Occult Teaching states; "The Great Breath digs through Space seven holes into Laya, to cause them to circumgyrate during Manvantara"; and this means that, for formative and creative purposes, the Great Law, or God, if you will, stays, or rather modifies, ITS perpetual motion on seven invisible points within the area of the Manifested Universe. Laya is that which Science might term the zero-point or line; the realm of absolute negativeness, or the One real Absolute Force, the noumenon of the Seventh State of that which we ignorantly call and recognise as "Force", or the noumenon of Undifferentiated Cosmic Substance, which is itself an unreachable and unknowable object for finite perception; the root and basis for all states of objectivity and also subjectivity; the neutral axis, not one of the many aspects, but its very centre. 
When the moment arrives, the Absolute Will expands in a natural manner the Force within it, according to the Law of which it is the inner and ultimate Essence. But to the untrained senses and consciousness of the profane and the 'scientist', everything beyond the line of differentiated Matter, or outside of, and beyond the Realm of Spiritual Substance, has to remain for ever unknown and equal to nothing. It is the Ain Soph of the Kabalists - No Thing. 
In the First Round our Globe, having been built by the primitive 'Fire-Lives', who formed it into a Sphere had no solidity, no qualifications, save a cold brightness, without any colour. The Earth was in her first 'Rupa', body or form, the essence of which is an Akashic Principle that must not be named, but which is now very erroneously termed 'Astral Light', which Eliphas Levi calls the 'Imagination of Nature', probably to avoid giving it its correct name, as others do. When he mentions it in the Preface to his 'Histoire de la Magie', he says; "It is through this Force that all the nervous centres secretly communicate with each other; from it that we have our dreams; 
from it that sympathy and antipathy are born; and that the phenomena of second sight and extra-natural visions take place.....Astral Light (acting under the impulsion of powerful wills).....destroys, coagulates, separates, breaks, gathers in all things.....God created it on that day when He said; "Fiat Lux".....It is directed by the Egregores, i.e., the Chiefs of the Souls, who are the Spirits of Energy and Action". He should have added that the Astral Light is the body of those Spirits themselves and their very Essence. These Entities are the Seven Primal 'Centres of Force' that develop later into the great Cosmic 'Elements'. 
Faraday, Boscovich and all others who saw in the atoms and molecules 'centres of force', and in the corresponding Element, Force, an Entity by itself, are far nearer the truth than those, who, denouncing them, denounce at the same time the "old corpuscular Pythagorean theory" one, by the way, which never passed to posterity as the great Philosopher really taught it on the ground of its "delusion that the conceptual elements of matter can be grasped as separate and real entities". 
Inertia, so-called, is Force, according to Newton, and for the students of Occult Science the greatest of the Occult Forces. A Body can only conceptually, only on this plane of illusion, be considered divorced from its relations with other bodies which, according to the physical and mechanical sciences, give rise to its attributes. In fact it can never be so detached; death itself being unable to detach it from its relation with the Universal Forces of which the One Force, or Life, is the synthesis: the interrelation simply continues on another Plane. 
Dr. James Croll, in 'On the transformation of Gravity', brings forward the view advocated by Faraday, Waterson and others, when he says that Gravity: "is a Force pervading Space external to bodies, and that, on the mutual approach of the bodies, the force is not increased, as is generally supposed, but the bodies merely pass into a place where the force exists with greater intensity". 
No one will deny that a Force, whether 'gravity', electricity, or any be it other Force, which exists outside bodies and in open Space Ether or Vacuum must be something, and not a pure nothing, when conceived apart from a mass. Otherwise it could hardly exist in one place with a greater and in another with reduced "intensity". 
Leibniz (1646-1716), as do the Occultists, endowed the whole of creation with mental life, this being, according to him, capable of infinite gradations. The mathematician, in order to calculate geometrical figures, is obliged to divide them into an infinite number of infinitely small parts, and the physicists see no limit to the divisibility of matter into atoms. Leibnitz followed these arguments to some extent, but he could not rest content in assuming that matter was composed of a finite number of very small parts. His mathematical mind forced him to carry out the argument ad infinitum. And what became of the atoms then? They lost their extension and they retained only their property of resistance; they were the centres of force, just as a Kosmos is a centre of Force. They were reduced to mathematical points. 
But if their extension in Space was nothing, so much fuller was their inner life! Assuming that inner existence, such as that of the human mind, is a new dimension, not a geometrical but a metaphysical dimension, having reduced the geometrical extension of the atoms to nothing, Leibniz endowed them with an infinite extension in the direction of their metaphysical dimension. After having lost sight of them in the world of space, the mind has, as it were, to dive into a metaphysical world to find and grasp the real essence of what appears in space merely as a mathematical point. As a cone stands on its point, or a perpendicular straight line cuts a horizontal plane only in one 
mathematical point, but may extend indefinitely in height and depth, so the essences and forces of things real have only a punctual existence in this physical world of Space; but have an infinite depth and height of inner life and power in the metaphysical world of thought. 
This is the Spirit, the very root of Occult Science. 
The 'Spirit-Matter' and 'Matter-Spirit' extend infinitely, and like the "essence of things" of Leibniz, our Essence of Things Real is at the seventh depth or seventh height; while the unreal and gross matter of science and the external world is at the lowest extreme of our perceptive senses. And the true Occultist knows the worth or worthlessness of both. 
This lecture completes another step in this grade: if there are any questions we shall be glad to hear from you as usual. 
With very best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
