SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 15. 

Dear Disciple, 
Our next subject is the Element of Fire, which you will know as the Father Element, completing the Mother Element of Water. Yet, each of these two elements is subject to the same Laws of Positive and Negative Force or Polarity. Although Fire is Positive and Water negative - or Male and Female - there is in each still a combination of positive and negative in addition. In such manner would a male human being be 75% positive or male, and 25% negative or female. A female is 75% negative and 25% positive, roughly speaking. If this were not so neither of the two, male or female beings, could manifest materially or otherwise. And it is when the final blending of Male and Female Entities takes place on the Spiritual Plane that the Two become really One; but this is for future consideration. 

There is One Flame in which countless Sparks have their being. The fact that such sparks descend in human beings makes them no less parts of that Flame, and there is never any difference in the Sparks themselves, but only in the bodies they 'inhabit' from time to time. Therefore to speak of "Thy Soul and my Soul", which again are Sparks of a different nature, that is to say different from the Life-Principle in the human body the Spark of Life, not the Soul or the Higher Mind would be wrong, for each Soul is ever a living particle of the great Flame of the Spirit, although each particle has also its own consciousness, yet it is but a part of the Greater Consciousness of God. 
The radical unity of the ultimate Essence of each constituent part of the compounds in Nature - from Star to mineral atom, from highest Dhyan Chohan to the smallest infusorium, in the fullest acceptance of the term, and whether applied to the Spiritual, intellectual or physical worlds this Unity is the one fundamental Law in Occult Science. "The Deity is boundless and infinite expansion", says an Occult Axiom. 
There is a deep philosophy underlying the earliest worship in the world, the worship of the Sun and of Fire. Of all the Elements known to physical Science, Fire is that which has ever eluded definite analysis. It is asserted confidentially that air is a mixture containing the gases oxygen and nitrogen, etc. We view the Universe and the Earth as matter composed of definite chemical molecules. We speak of the primitive ten earths, endowing each with a Greek or Latin name. We say that water is, chemically, a compound of oxygen and hydrogen. But what is Fire? It is the effect of combustion we are gravely answered. It is heat and light and motion, and a correlation of physical and chemical forces in general. And this scientific definition is philosophically the supplemented by a Theological one in Webster's Dictionary, which explains Fire as the instrument of punishment in another state "state", by the way, being supposed to be 'spiritual'; but, alas! the presence of Fire would seem to be a convincing proof of its material nature. 
What has Occult Science to say with regard to Fire? "Fire is the most perfect and unadulterated reflection, in Heaven as on Earth, of the One Flame. It is Life and Death, the origin and the end of every material thing. It is Divine Substance". Thus, not only the Fire-Worshipper, the Parsi, but even the wandering savage tribes of America, which proclaim themselves "born of fire", show more science in their creeds and truth in their superstitions, than all the speculations of modern physics and learning. And as the Christians say: "God is a living Fire; the Lord thy God is a consuming Fire", and so on, it does not seem reasonable that the Occult Teaching should be considered unphilosophical when it states that: "Thus were formed the Worlds of Spirit and Matter: from One Light Seven Lights; from each of the Seven, seven times Seven", and so forth. And when we consider the visions of such inspired Seers as, for instance, Hildegard of Bingen, born 1098, who became the abbess of a convent, and we are told that her visions had a 'pathological' basis, and her 'symptoms' were those of 'scintillating scotoma', we seem to have a certain amount of justification when we doubt the accuracy of the medical verdict after reading her descriptions of what she saw with the eye of the spirit. Here is a passage in which she sums up her experiences: 
"From my infancy, up to the present time, I being now more than seventy years of age (she died at 82), I have always seen this light in my spirit and not with external eyes, nor with any thoughts of my heart nor with help from the senses. But my outward eyes remain open and the other corporeal senses retain their activity. The light which I see is not located but is yet more brilliant than the sun, nor can I examine its height, length or breadth, and I name it the 'cloud of the living light'. And as sun, moon and stars are reflected in water, so the writings, sayings, virtues and works of men shine in it before me. And whatever I thus see in vision the memory thereof remains long with me. Likewise I see, hear and understand almost in a moment and I set down what I thus learn. But sometimes I behold within this light another light which I name 'the living Light itself"..... And when I look upon it every sadness and pain vanishes from my memory, so that I am again as a simple maid and not as an old woman. 
 
"And now that I am over seventy years old my spirit, according to the will of God, soars upward in vision to the highest heaven and to the farthest stretch of the air and spreads itself among different peoples to regions exceeding far from me here, and For thence I can behold the changing clouds and the mutations of all created things; for all these I see not with the outward eye, nor do I create them from the cogitations of my heart.....but within my spirit, my eyes being open, so that I have never suffered any terror". 

After reading the above simple statement of an evidently sincere woman, the bleatings of 'scientists' who try to find some imposing sounding term for her 'pathological' condition can be safely ignored; and our students of this grade will be able to find a much better explanation than any mere scientist will be able to. If Hildegard of Bingen suffered from 'hystero-epilepsy' 'split personality', migraine, etc., as has been stated too, then what did Ezekiel, Daniel, St. John the Divine, and many others suffer from, we ask. Other Seers of the same period as Hildegard, such as Elizabeth of Schönau and later on, Gertrude of Robersdorf, were simply accused of imitating Hildegard, and using their supposed ecstatic visions as 'literary devices'. How clever scientists are in finding labels to stick on anything they cannot understand! 

In the ancient teachings it is written: "Man needs four Flames and Three Fires to become one on Earth, and he requires the essence of the forty-nine fires to be perfect". These refer, of course, to the four lower — and temporary-human principles, and the three higher and eternal ones; each of which is again septenary in its turn. 
The fire of electricity as we know it on Earth, is but the result of ordinary matter affected by something invisible, the ultimate generating power of every Force, the "one omnipresent influence", which again proves that every Element is dual in its nature, a belief held by the Ancients. It is said: "Ethereal Fire is the emanation of the Kabir proper; the Aerial is but the union (or correlation) of the former with terrestrial Fire, and its guidance and application on our Earthly Plane belongs to a Kabir of a lesser dignity" - an Elemental, as an Occultist would call it. 
Shankaracharya, one of the greatest Esoteric Masters of India, stated that Fire means a deity which presides over Time. And here is another clue when it is said that: "The first after the One is Divine Fire..... The One is not concerned with Man-bearing Globes, but with the inner, invisible Spheres".....then we are another step nearer to the 'Ultimate Mystery.' The First after the One is, of course, the Hidden Logos of a Kosmos, who comes after the One Supreme Deity of the Universe; and both are 'Fires'. This is why it is stated that; "The Form would be consumed were I to give it mine!' said the Great Fire". 
The teachings also state that the only difference between animate and inanimate objects on Earth, between an animal and a human frame, is that in some the various 'Fires' are latent, and in others active in varying degrees. The vital Fires are in all things, however, and not an atom is devoid of them. 
The Second Round brings into manifestation the second Element - which is Air; an Element, the purity of which would ensure continuous life to him who would use it. There have been very few Occultists who have discovered air in its purest form, and compared with it the Ozone of modern chemistry is rank poison. Oxygen is a colourless, odourless, tasteless, non-toxic gas, found free in the atmosphere mixed with nitrogen, argon, carbon dioxide and water vapour. Liquid oxygen is strongly magnetic, and it was discovered by Priestly in 1774 by heating mercuric oxide, while Scheele discovered it independently in the same year. Ozone is a blue gas, of characteristic odour, formed when ordinary oxygen is subject to electrostatic discharge. It is used as a bleaching agent for fatty oils, as a disinfectant for air and water, and as an oxidizing agent. 

It will only be in the next, or Fifth Round, that the fifth Element, will become a Ether the gross body of Primordial Substance familiar fact of Nature to all men, as Air is now. And not until that Round will the higher senses be susceptible of a complete expansion. Already there are some indications of this expansion among the peoples of the Earth. We are not now talking of students of Occultism, although even among them it is only the Adept who really can be aware of the deeper secrets of Nature. Nor can any but an Adept reach the three higher Spiritual states during extension of consciousness and remember; and even he may not always be able to do so. 

It is only when we find such great Seers as Enoch eminently the Apostle of whom Fire is an emblem, and in whose revelations it plays so great a part that there is full memory of every detail and word seen and heard in vision. He, more than any other of the preceding Messengers, appears to have been studied by Zoroaster, who has made Fire so great a feature of his Songs. 
In Chapter 19 of the Book of Enoch by Kenealy we read the following allusions to some of the Elements, plus that which holds the Universe together: 
"God, by His Spirit, raised me up into a place Where was the appearance of gleaming Fires; 
And when they pleased they assumed the shapes of Men; Men of majesty and heroic beauty. 
One They bare me onwards to a lofty height; 
To a mountain which reached the Empyrean: 
There did I behold the Receptacles of Thunders 
At the extremities of the place where the Gulf was deepest, And each one had in his hand a bow of fire, 
And arrows in the shining quiver; 
A sword of fire and armour of pure flame, And lightnings terrible in brightness. Then they lifted me to living Waters Waters of Life that spake audibly, 

And to a flame which caught the setting of the sun, 
And from which the Sun drew new blood. 
I surveyed the Magnet which supports the World; The Four Winds which bear up the corners of the earth; The wave amid the heavenly firmament". 
In the above you will be able to recognise quite a number of Ancient Teachings; but the vision of the Magnet especially is worthy of observation. It reveals, what Newton is supposed to have first discovered, the great doctrine of Attraction, which we know keeps the Universe together. The Universe itself is but a vast magnet, or Fire-stone. The Star clusters, the Suns, the Earths, the Moons revolve under magnetic Laws. The acquisition of this knowledge in those remote ages may well be a matter of surprise, were not all surprise swallowed up in the contemplation of the Apocalypse. Note that At-laz supporting the Heaven means the Magnet or Fire-Stone which keeps the Universe in place. Upon this was founded the worship of Jupiter l'Apis, the Loadstone of the Universe; the God who holds its mighty parts together. 
There is a quantity of recondite lore upon this in ancient Mythology. The rays of magnetic illumination, says Nimrod, all centre in the soul of the Great Iliaster, as the vitality of all our nerves and veins hath its centre in the brain or heart. For which reason all persons who enjoy life, live in Him, and He in them, and the resurrection to everlasting life consists in the everlasting re-union of their souls to the Soul of the Great Iliaster. And that both the Magnet and Jupiter L'Apis had an Occult meaning, is clear from the deeply mystic saying of Roger Bacon: "Lapis non Lapis" - this Stone is no Stone: meaning, it is God. The Magnet was typified by a white stone; it had magnetic powers, and in vague recollection of this primeval custom and tradition, it is, that every Jew and Orientals generally - regard it almost as a matter of religion to wear a Diamond. For it is an emblem of the Great Mother the Holy Spirit, and also an emblem of God the Father: the two being One; for it contains Fire of the purest Water in the magnetic Balance of Attraction and Repulsion — or Divine Equilibrium.

With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
 
