SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER 10-2
Set answer to "Ten numbers with what?” 
Dear Disciple, 
In Lecture No.10 of this Grade, we asked you to meditate on the following Teaching from the Sepher Yetzirah and send us your interpretation of the hidden meanings within it: 
"Ten numbers with what? One: the Spirit of the living God....who liveth in eternities. Voice and Spirit and Word, and this is the Holy Spirit. Two: Air out of Spirit. He designed and hewed therewith twenty- two letters of foundation, three mothers and seven double and twelve single, and one Spirit out of them. Three: Water out of Spirit; he designed and hewed with them the barren and the void, mud and earth. He designed them as a flower-bed, hewed them as a valley, covered them as a paving. Four: Fire out of Water. He designed and hewed therewith the throne of glory and the wheels, and the seraphim and the holy animals as ministering angels, and of the three He founded His dwelling as it is said, He makes his angels Spirits, and his servants fiery flames!" 
Our set answer follows below, which we would ask you to carefully compare with the interpretation you sent to us. 
Ten numbers with what? 


This Teaching is concerned with the manifestation and evolution of the Kosmos from the immutable First Cause, or 0 from 1. This concealed meaning is reflected in the name of the Mystery God which was IO or 10. "One: the Spirit of the living God....," refers to the Supreme Deity. "Voice and Spirit and Word..." is the occult Trinity of Father-Mother-Son, or Supreme Deity, Hidden Logos and Manifesting Logos. This trinity may also be viewed as Fire, Light and Heat, or Motion, Fire and Moisture, each of which is correct in itself, but not necessarily complete. 
Two: Air out of Spirit..." refers to Aether, the first element to be manifested in each new Manvantara. Similarly, "Three: Water out of Spirit..." and "Four: Fire out of water..." refer to the order of manifestation of the Four Elements of Primary Creation. Actually, the correct order is Aether, Fire, Air, Water, Earth. The Pythagoreans called Four the Root of all things, which, when written out in four vertical lines produce the Tetractys or Mystic Decad (1+2+3+4=10). All this refers to the various stages in the construction of the Universe and the manifestation of the hierarchies of sentient beings, including man (the 'holy animal'). 
The words 'mud' and 'earth', 'flowerbed', 'valley', and 'paving' all refer to the realms above and below and the materials used to construct them. The "three mothers and seven double and twelve single, and one Spirit out of them" refer to the three hierarchies of Gods who gave unto man his Higher Mind, Divine Spark and lower mind/body, whilst 7 and 12 refer respectively to the seven rays and the 12 signs of the Zodiac through which man (the 'One Spirit') enters into manifestation. "He makes his angels Spirits..." To the awakened inner sight the beings in the highest realms, such as Enoch saw in vision, appear as glorious flames, though they can take on a body if they wish it in a flash. 
There is a lot in this Teaching which is not correct such as the "twenty-two letters of foundation" which refer in a hidden manner to the 22 paths of the Jewish Kabbalistic Tree of Life. These paths are wrong, as are the ten sephiroth to which they are connected, as we shall show in the Inner Circle when we reveal the REAL Egyptian TREE of 12 sephiroth and 36 paths to you. Nonetheless, enough is correct to allow the diligent Student to sift the true from the false and the nearly true (such as the order of the Elements), and so develop their interpretative abilities. This is the principal reason we give you such meditation exercises from time to time. 
H.M. 
