SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER. Grade 3. Number 18. 

Dear Disciple, 
In Lecture Number 23 of Grade 2 we made some slight allusions to the Aura. The time has now arrived when we must discuss the Aura a little more in detail, and we advise you to read carefully once again the Lecture just mentioned. In fact, each Student should now and again. refresh his or her memory by looking up the various subjects that are discussed and developed throughout the Grades. Thus a complete picture will be formed in the mind, and each Law and Principle will become firmly fixed in the memory, so that all will have a thorough and clear understanding of the various things we reviewed and studied. 
You will remember that we have told you that each particle of matter which goes by the name of 'Atom' has a magnetic and protective field around it, and that this also applies to the molecules, and larger bodies of matter, even to a planet, a sun, a Kosmos or a Universe; and it too applies to the various bodies within an Atom. It is, of course, well known to Occultism that no two atoms ever touch one another, for each has its own field of action and vibration, attraction and repulsion, and so forth, just as a planet, sun or Universe, and there is always space between them under any possible conditions with the exception of the 'White Dwarfs' mentioned in Grade 1 and the so-called 'neutron' stars, about which science is currently speculating. Therefore, every physical atom or molecule, as well as the inner parts of an atom, is floating in an 'Atmosphere' which we may liken to a sort of Astral Ocean, an ocean of astral matter which surrounds these particles and bodies and fills every interstice between them and interpenetrates them, and this astral matter is called 'Ether', which flows through the densest solid as easily as it does through the most rarefied gas. And so does Spirit - which we may term 'Mental Matter' of a higher kind mix, mingle with and penetrate both astral matter as well as solid bodies, for it is impossible to confine a 'thought' within anything; and in 'thinking', man has perfect freedom from all material obstacles, according to the power of his intellect and wisdom. And for this reason all these astral, ethereal and mental 'matters' and vibrations surround and penetrate our bodies as well as our thoughts from all sides and every possible direction at various rates of speed and vibration. 

When a person is 'sensitive' he can often 'feel' these vibrations passing through him, and we have known - and do know of people so delicately constructed that they have been able to hear radio broadcasts without the aid of a receiving set. And it is thus that we have our 'mediums', and our Prophets and Seers, persons who can 'pick-up' the various vibrations within the Universe by means of the Higher Mind, and penetrate the mysteries of the past, present and future in diverse ways. They can extend their consciousness and 'tune in' to almost any vibration in the atmosphere surrounding our globe, and beyond. 
Now if we wish to be able to see 'Auras' and know what they mean when we do see them, we have to cultivate these extended powers of the five senses by means of such exercises as we have given you up to now, and by means of others yet to come. We have also to cultivate the awareness of the Higher Mind in conjunction with the senses, and try to awaken the two further senses within ourselves; senses not yet known to the generality of mankind, and almost unknown to nearly every Occultist. But before we can correctly interpret an Aura once we can see it we must know something about it first, and therefore we shall now discuss it more in detail. 
The Aura vibrates and glows around the body from the moment that the Life-Principle enters the form of the newly born child. It is in a constant state of flux, and with every thought or emotion the mental, ethereal and astral matter within ourselves swirls, rotates and moves in different ways in such a manner that every thought, feeling or impulse can be clearly perceived within the Aura by the trained clairvoyant, who sees it in the form of various vibrations and colours, which are first set up within and then flow out through and affecting the Aura, thus reaching and mingling with the ethereal matters around, reaching other minds and senses as we stated before. Man is quite unconscious of all this as a rule, for the majority of mankind are so constructed that their inner perceptive senses are not yet evolved sufficiently to perceive or feel such fine vibrations.....fortunately for most. Moreover, every impression that reaches the Higher or lower Mind via the brain and the senses has to pass through various grades of matter before it can reach the real Ego in its full and complete significance. You will remember that we told you in a previous lecture (Grade 2, Number 20) that it takes one-tenth of a second to tell a man that some one has stuck a pin in his toe; this will explain our meaning. 
It was the medieval alchemist who invented the term 'astral', which was meant to convey that the Plane above the physical was of a 'starry' or luminous nature, manifesting on a more rapid rate of vibration; in other words: manifesting on a higher octave, or on higher octaves. This Higher Plane is also thought to be a world of passion, emotion and sensation; and some teachings state that it is through the astral body manifesting on that Plane that all man's feelings exhibit themselves to the clairvoyant investigator. But this is quite incorrect, and you know that the Astral Planes and the astral body are quite divorced from the ordinary human passions and emotions of the lower mind or body, and we have given you many details of what the Astral Planes really are. 
When the colours of the Aura change continually on account of our emotions, these changes are mainly due to the senses; and such colours are quite distinct from the finer vibrations that can reach the Higher Mind only - and not the lower under any circumstances. But this will be discussed anon. The trouble with so many teachings is that in them are mixed up all sorts of lower and higher principles, with the result that the student becomes utterly bewildered and cannot escape from the maze of contradictory 'revelations'. It is our purpose to keep these things strictly separated and docketed in their right compartments. Once this has been done the later blending of them all will create little difficulty. 
In the lowest type of man the Aura has very little colour; it is mostly of a grey tint, with faint gleams of colour shining in it spasmod- ically; it has been compared with an empty soap bubble, and this is a good description. The man being of a low state of intellect, at the very beginning of his evolution, he has not yet learned to vibrate in response to any impacts from without, hence there is very little colour. It is only when he becomes violently agitated that angry flashes of colour may be seen clairvoyantly. The details of the various colours connected with the senses and their emotions will follow. During the course of his many cycles of incarnations his Aura will develop gradually and become more and more full of tints and shades of different colours. But it will be plain to the understanding that the lower type of man cannot reach out to any of the Higher Realms at all during his life on Earth, for he is concerned only with the cares of his material existence, and with nothing else. During the course of his early incarnations the lower mind becomes more and more aware of itself, while the Higher Mind is still mostly latent. His lower mind gathers strength by selfishness and becomes more and more 'solid' as it were. The Aura thickens gradually and takes on a number of dark and coarse hues, and in the intervals between the incarnations he has only one aim: to plunge again into manifested life on Earth, due to the desire to feel himself 'alive' and give full reign to the lower human passions. In time he begins to sense that there is something higher than the sea of earthly matter into which he dives again and again, and then that strong shell that he has built up which was necessary in order to create a powerful astral vehicle begins to irk, and the desire for evolution towards the finer realms commences to grow, but it takes numerous incarnations before there is any perceptible development towards spiritual extension of the Higher Mind. Meanwhile, although the colours of his Aura are dark and coarse, there is at least a certain luminosity within them, and they may be compared to dimly glowing fires. 
The Latin word 'Aura', may be used for 'breeze', and also for 'fire', which latter has been sometimes figured as a breeze to be sent by the Gods to speed the 'ships' on their voyage; but the word 'Ouros' also means 'sacred fire', and the secret connection between 'ships' and 'sacred fire' refers to the Higher Hind projecting (or the 'ship' sailing) within the Astral Body which is permeated with and surrounded by the sacred fire of the Aura, and this fire is the 'breeze' driving onwards the 'ship'. In such a manner we can find references to the Aura in some ancient Greek writings, and on the monumental inscriptions of Spon; and it is well known that the creator spirit is equally represented in holy writ by a fire or luminous glory and by a rushing wind, while the divine particula aura (divinae particula aurae of Horace) in a man is called 'anemos' or animus, and anima pneuma, or spiritus. 
And we are here reminded of a rather amusing historical fact, connected with the manner in which the Christians have produced some of their 'Saints'. For in the Dyonysiaca, of Nonnus, the god Bacchus is feigned to have fallen in love with the soft, genial breeze, under the name of Aura Placida. Out of this they have made the 'Saints' Aura and Placida! Their festival is on the fifth of October, close to the festival of St. Bacchus, and of St. Denis the Areopagite. 
At each stage of man's ascent it will be seen that while his higher nature exhibits more and more power of expression of the nobler qualities, so he will lose gradually his more brutal and lower powers. The dense colours of his Aura begin to clear up and become more luminous. The particularly unpleasant lurid hue of coarse sensuality, for instance, finds no place in the Aura of a man who has progressed to the higher stages of awareness and refinement. Although that man may have 'sensual' feelings, they are no longer of the same nature as those of the lowly evolved being. Moreover, such feelings will be always combined with the principle of Love in its higher aspects - if the man is really advanced - and Love is the very antithesis of selfish lust and other evils. 

The process by which the colours appear works always from below upwards. At each impression the human Entity feels a wave of lesser or greater emotion surging through him, This vibration causes the emotion endures a colour to appear in the Aura. As the emotion dies down, the colour fades again. If a man is irritable, for instance, a scarlet cloud forms within the Aura; he 'sees red'. If there is a great outburst of this irritability the cloud is deep scarlet. When the fit of temper dies down, the colour fades, but: there are always some slight traces of it left, and if the man gives way often to 'temper' his Aura will show gradually more and more of this scarlet, and the fact that the colour is ever present makes it exceedingly difficult for him not to grow irritable at the slightest excuse. The same applies to all emotions, good or bad. When there is a comparatively permanent colour in the Aura, or a combination of permanent colours, caused by one or more persistent vibrations within the man, it is very easy to read that man's temperament and the state of his feelings and achievements if one looks at him clairvoyantly. And as we are always reincarnated with all our previously acquired mental and other attributes each time we appear on Earth, it will be easy to perceive the great dangers as well as the great benefits for every one who either lacks or has control of all his inner faculties; for these grow in whatever direction we bend them from life to life. Hence our everlasting insistence on the Peace meditations, etc. 
When we pass on from the really primitive man to the more developed savage, we shall see that the latter has already a large range of colours in his Aura. None of these colours is very permanent, however, for the lower entity is still in a constant state of flux within; having not yet had a sufficiently great number of incarnations to make possible a definite stabilisation of his inner character. He lives from moment to moment, and any really brilliant colours flash out and die again from one moment to another. He may be laughing merrily one second and the next fly into an immediate and violent rage, to dance with glee a few seconds later when he has 'removed' the cause of his anger. Thus, such an outburst of fury would cause deep-red flashes on a black background; sudden fear will change the whole into a mist of ghastly livid grey. But during periods of comparative rest and quiet there will show a more or less definite group of several colours within his Aura, showing just where he stands in the scheme of his evolution. 
We shall continue this subject in our next lecture. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
