SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 3. Number 19. 

Dear Disciple, 
The combinations of colours within the Aura are as infinite in variety as humankind in itself. If we wish to say that such and such an emotion produces this or that colour; we must do so with modifications, for human emotions are seldom of an unmixed character. You know that scarlet is the colour for anger; and thus crimson, as well as rose, is the colour of love. So far, so good. But we must also remember that those or any other colours, may be mixed up with the colours of such an emotion as selfishness, the colour of which is a hard brown-grey. This latter shade will tinge and darken any other colour if it is present in the Aura, thus modifying it more or less, according to the strength of the vice of selfishness. Pride, on the other hand, is represented by a deep orange. The most common hues are: 
1. Black. This always indicates hatred and malice if we see it in the aura; and when it is present in the shape of a black cloud within the astral body as well, or like coils of heavy smoke, this means that that person is the victim of fits of passionate anger. 
2. Red. As we said before, this shows anger, and if tinged with brown it shows selfish anger instead of the brilliant flashes of scarlet on the ordinary background of the aura when anger or indignation is aroused on behalf of others, who may be suffering from injustice etc. A lurid sanguinary red indicates sensuality. 
3. Brown. If a dull brown-red, a rusty tint, it shows avarice, and it generally takes the form of parallel bars across the whole of the astral body. The dull hard brown-grey of selfishness is unfortunately a very common thing in the aura of most people. If there is a greenish-brown, lit up by deep red or scarlet flashes, it denotes jealousy. 
4. Grey. If thick and heavy it shows depression, and it can at times blot out all the rest of the colours. It shows also in parallel lines, making it appear as if the person is behind prison bars which in actuality he is. A stark, livid grey shows fear; this is a most dreadful hue to behold. 
5. Crimson. This is the colour of love; but, as we said, it is generally found in conjunction with other colours, which dull it as a rule. But if it is caused by pure unselfish love there is a beautiful rosy tint. When this is tinged with lilac it denotes spiritual love for humanity. 
6. Orange. This is the colour of pride and ambition; subject to the same countless variations as the rest of the colours. 
7. Yellow. This is the colour of intellectuality. If dull, the intellect is more concerned with material matters, but if it is of a brilliant golden colour, rising to clear and luminous lemon or primrose yellow, it shows that the Higher Mind has reached out, and has reached the realms of the Higher Intellect, or Wisdom. 
8. Green. This is a difficult colour to describe, for it has a greater variety of meanings than any other. It has to do with what one might term 'adaptability'. If grey-green it means deceit and cunning, and this is mostly found in the Aura of savages and lowly evolved persons. But it is very often seen in the Aura of the so-called 'civilised' man who ought to know better, but does not! Emerald-green indicates versatility, ingenuity and also fickleness of mind; but in general it is of a much higher standard and shows the ability to be a 'good mixer'; first in order to obtain the goodwill of others, and later in order to be able to understand and help those who are in need of such assistance. When it becomes a beautiful pale, luminous blue-green, it shows the deepest sympathy and compassion, one of the finest qualities of human nature, together with the power of perfect adaptability. A bright apple-green indicates a strong vitality. 
9. Blue. Dark blue, if clear, usually indicates religious feeling, but it is subject to many tints and shades, according to the purity or bigotry of this state of mind, or its selfishness or nobility. It may range from any shade of indigo on one side to a rich deep violet on the other, or it may manifest in the nasty shade of muddy grey-blue we can see at times in the Aura of a low savage when he worships, or sacrifices to his rude 'gods'. Any tinge of love or fear, sanctimonious pretence, harsh dogmatism, and so on, to the cruelty of the religious zealot or fanatic, may mingle with the feeling of 'religion', and show upon the background of blue, or mix with it. When we see a lighter blue, such as cobalt or ultramarine, we may be sure that here is devotion to a noble spiritual ideal. When this tint rises to a luminous lilac-blue it indicates the higher forms of spiritual evolution; often we see then a host of golden stars sparkling upon this background; and this shows the most perfect spiritual elevation. 
These, then, are the most common colours; but there are, of course, numberless others too. But we may assume that the general brilliancy of an Astral Body and its Aura, together with its comparative definiteness in outline, and the brightness of the colours within it, show high development of the Entity of whom it forms a part. And the opposite is also true naturally. 

In medicine, the word 'Aura' denotes a peculiar sensation which may precede the onset of an epileptic attack. The phenomenon is composed of a group of mixed feelings as a rule such as apprehension, fear and oppression. Needless to say this has no connection with the kind of Aura we are discussing! 
Aurora, the Goddess of Morning, is a name for the Holy Spirit; in Egyptian it is Aur-Aur-Ray, Fire, the Ray or Emanation of Fire. So was Pallas another of her names, the Flame issuing from Zeus. 
In the Book of Fo, the Third Messenger of God, or the Third Messiah, there appears the following: 
"Go thou, O teacher, 
Into the land that is called Aurora of the East; 
There separate the Light from Darkness; 
Breathe morning breath upon its people". 
Chin-tan, or China-land, is here called 'Aurora of the East'. Separating the Light from Darkness will be clear to you after our previous discussion on the Aura, for it refers in one sense to the clearing up of the dark shades within it by means of the Enlightenment the 'Preacher' will bring to these people, thus raising their thoughts and emotions to higher states of consciousness, which higher thoughts will shine forth within the Aura. 
The same meaning and explanation can be found when Nimrod states that; "Chrysalis appears to signify the permutation of gold"; and it has been termed 'Aurelia' also. In its connection with the word 'Psyche', which means Soul as well as butterfly, but with a different accent, we may discern that the Ancients held the Soul to be an emanation of the Solar Virtue, Aura, or Aither. Aura, ouranous, or aour of the Hebrews, is the Light of Heaven, and it gives name to the metal aurum, or gold. 
The word Aur, in Hebrew, also stands for 'Father of Fire'. In the Sanskrit, Chaldean, ancient Irish, as well as in many other ancient tongues, the word appears in one form or another; but it is always connected with sacred Fire, with the Sun, with God, and so on. So in the Scandinavian Mythology, the Norn, nymphs that dwell by the Well of Urd, take water every day from the Spring, which with the mud that lies about it, they pour over the Ash 'Yggdrasil' that its branches may not perish. This water is so sacred that everything that enters it becomes as white as the film of an eggshell as it is said in the Völuspá: 
"An ash I know 
A branchy tree bedewed With brightest water. Thence come the dews Into the dales that falls Ever stands it flourishing Over Urda's fountain". 
The dew that falls from its branches on the earth, is by men called honey-dew, and it is the food of the bees. Two birds are fed in the Well of Urd, called Swans (Messianic symbols), and from them descend the birds of that species. 
Note that this word 'Urd', or Urda, is significant and symbolic: for it is a compound of the radical 'Aur', which from the beginning has been applied to the Deity; and which conveys the idea of Water, Fire and Light; Streams of Lightning and the Starry Spheres; all of them types and representatives of the Great Father and the Great Mother; and of 'Di', which Parkhurst admits to be the root of De, Di, Te, or Dia, the only appellation by which God is known to those who speak the Gaelic of Britain and Ireland. It is the root also of Deus, and the Greek Dios; and is part of the Chinese word, Ti-en, or Heavenly One. The Well of Urda, therefore, means primarily the Holy Spirit of God; and secondarily the Vast Universe, from which, as from a Well of Fire, proceeds all existence; all creation. And in such manner can connections be discovered between all the divine principles of God, the Universe, the Creators and Man. 
From the word 'Aur' comes also the name of 'Hari', the Hindu Lord of Light; and the dawn, or Aurora, is Uri-El, a Fire-Angel of God. To express Fire or Light the Ancients said at first 'Ur', then an Aleph was added at the beginning of the word to pronounce it more softly, and that made 'Aur'. Others have added the letter N, and have pronounced it Nur. The Greeks have put a labial letter at the beginning, whence they have made it Pur. Orion, is Aur-Ion, the Dove of Fire a name for the Kabiric Messenger; though he destroys, it is in love and humanity to the rest of the world. Orion is described by Paloephatus as hunting with Diana - this is a Messiah. 
Some authorities trace the existence of the Aura in such scriptural instances as the bright light shining about Moses, which the Children of Israel were unable to look upon, when he descended from the mountain bearing the stone tablets engraved with the Ten Commandments; in the exceedingly brilliant light which shone round about St. Paul's vision at the time of his conversion; and in the transfiguration of Jesus Christ, when his raiment shone so brightly that no fuller on earth could whiten it. Many of the medieval Saints were said to be surrounded with a cloud of light. Of St. John of the Cross it is told that when at the altar or kneeling in prayer, a certain brightness darted from his face; St. Philip Neri was constantly seen enveloped in light; St. Charles Borromeo was similarly illuminated. All such phenomena are due to the fact that when a person is engaged in lofty thought and spiritual aspiration, the auric clouds become for the time being, more luminous and translucent, therefore more easily discernible. In Christian art, round the heads of saints, and the sacred characters, is to be found portrayed the halo or nimbus which represents the Aura; sometimes the luminous cloud is shown around the whole body as well as the head, when it is called aureola. The crowns and distinctive head-dresses worn by the kings and priests of antiquity were also symbolic of the Aura. In many of the sacred books of the East too, representations of the great teachers and holy men are given with the light extending round the whole of the body. Instances of this may be found in the temple caves of India and Ceylon, in the Japanese Buddhistic books, also in Egypt, Greece, Mexico and Peru. 
In the Occult literature of the West the tradition of the Aura is an old one, Paracelsus, in the 16th. Century, making mention of it in the following terms: "The vital force is not enclosed in man, but radiates round him like a luminous sphere, and it may be made to act at a distance. In these semi-natural rays (why semi your Masters do not know!) the imagination of man may produce healthy or morbid effects. It may poison the essence of life and cause diseases, or it may purify it after it has been made impure, and restore the health". Again: "Our thoughts are simply magnetic emanations, which, in escaping from our brain, penetrate into kindred heads and carry thither, with a reflection of our life, the mirage of our secrets". But we are afraid that in the last sentence Paracelsus mixed up the principles of thought-transference with the auric radiations; for the two are distinct and separate principles as soon as the thought has escaped from the human brain, body and Aura, and they are then quite disconnected. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
