SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Grade 3. Number 20. 

Dear Disciple, 
In this lecture we shall discuss another Chakram and this time we take the throat centre. When this Chakram is fully vivified it bestows the faculty of clairaudience; it is in close magnetic relationship with the so-called 'Muladhara' Chakram at the base of the spine, and it is not unusual to find that disturbances of the creative organs and functions produce corresponding disorders of the throat, which is the higher creative centre. It is the Fifth Sacred Centre, and those who are beginning to succeed in awakening it may hear sounds of music, voices that may make all sorts of suggestions, and, at times, unpleasant sounds. The prayer for protection should always be remembered before meditating on any Chakram, as well as the lapse of time between meditations on each separate centre, and a prayer of thanks for the protection received should follow the meditations without fail. Ten minutes, not more than twice per week, should be the time for each meditation on this centre. When the powers of hearing begin to manifest themselves, the sounds thus received come from one of the astral planes. For this reason it will be quite evident that the student should be completely at Peace in every sense of the word when he tries this experiment. Unrest would attune the student with the lower astral planes, below the Earth Plane. This would, or could, be dangerous. The student should retain all his reasoning and critical faculties at all times during these meditations, and when any message is received he should weigh it up with the most extreme and minute care, in case that message has been sent by one of the lower entities. Gullibility in these matters might lead to most unpleasant things. So you are warned!! If in doubt at any time - write to us about these things. 
The laryngeal centre has sixteen partitions or divisions. There is a good deal of blue in it, but its general effect is silvery and gleaming, with a kind of suggestion as of moonlight upon rippling water. Blue and green, however, predominate alternately in its sections. 
And we must here give an additional warning: when a person has succeeded in awakening fully all the astral senses, it does not always follow that he will be able to bring through into his physical consciousness any awareness of their action. Very often it is only the Higher Mind alone, and not the 'reasoning' brain, which is fully aware of the powers added to the higher Ego in its Higher Mind Principle. We know quite a number of highly developed mystics and occultists who have never experienced any outer realisation of such phenomena; yet in their acts, sayings and writings they show a very high knowledge of things Divine, which leaves the average man, and the average occultist 
too, gaping with astonishment. And of such are also many great artists of various kinds. They may not have practised any meditations or exercises in this life, but in more than one previous incarnation they have learnt to do these things, and you know that we return with all our attributes each time we come to Earth again. But, as we remarked, even if one does practise these things now, the results may remain hidden so far as the 'phenomena' are concerned. Please remember this. 
The only way in which the earthly body can be brought to share all the advantages derived from the rousing of the sacred centres, however, is by constantly repeating the meditations in the manner advised by us. 
In India there are recognised seven Schools of Yoga (pronounced 'Yog') They are: 
1. Raja Yoga; 2. Karma Yoga; 3. Jnana Yoga; 4. Hatha Yoga; 5. Laya Yoga; 6. Bhakti Yoga; 7. Mantra Yoga. 
Our advice is to leave all of them severely alone, unless we give further instructions later on, either privately or in these lectures. The above named systems all recognise the existence and importance of the Chakras, and each has its own method of developing them. 
It will be clear to you by now why we advised you in Lecture 2 of Grade 2 when we introduced the subject of the Chakras, to imagine a pin-point of light within the heart centre. There is present in each of the sacred centres such a light; the size, intensity and brilliancy of it varies with each person, naturally; but that light is present in every sacred centre of each separate human being, while in the centres of the bodies of animals it is but a faint and dim glimmer only. 
We have mentioned the word 'Nous' once or twice in our previous lectures; but we must now look at it a little closer for a few moments. With the Greeks, it meant a part of the creature, man or animal, of which the outer entity is the type or personal expression. But the inner principle Nous survives when the outer part perishes. Nous is therefore an immortal and divine principle in that sense; but it is never the 'principle of sensations'; it is ever the most pure principle of Man's Ego the Spiritual Principle. It is Soul - and it is Thought; Divine Thought; and the Higher Mind represents Will. When these two 'marry' when the human will of the Higher Mind deliberately chooses to attune completely with the Divine Soul, leaving the tyranny of the lower, material mind behind for good, this is the Alchemical Marriage, and only thus can the Higher Mind find liberation, and all the needs for further incarnation will be over and done with. 
In connection with this one should ever remember the great difference between the words 'Logos' and 'Demiurgos', for the following reasons. The Hidden Logos, also called the Heavenly Man, the Tetragrammaton, the Protogonos, Tikkoun; is the First-Born from the passive Deity. 
The first manifestation of the Deity's Shadow (which is the Hidden Logos) is the Universal Form and Idea, which engenders the Manifested Logos, or Adam Kadmon, or the four-lettered symbol in the Kabalah, that of the Universe itself, and this manifested Logos is called the Second Logos; and this is the Demiurge. According to the Sephirothal Tree the Second springs from the First and develops the Third Triangle, from the last of which (namely: the lower Host of Angels) Men are generated. The Hidden Logos, then, stands for the Soul, Positive and unmanifested, and the Demiurge for the (Manifested) Higher Mind. Nous is therefore synonymous with the unmanifested Hidden Logos, the superior Principle, which is in close affinity with the Divine, Supreme Deity. Nous is the superior apprehending Principle, the Higher Mind the comprehending; or the first is noëtic and the second phrenic. 
Moreover, Man was regarded in several Philosophical Systems as the Third Logos. The Esoteric meaning of the word Logos - Speech or Word, Verbum is the rendering in objective expression, as in a photograph, of the Concealed Thought. The Hidden Logos is the Mirror reflecting Divine Mind, and the Kosmos is the Mirror of the Logos, though the latter is at the same time the esse of the Kosmos. As the Logos reflects ALL in the Manifested Kosmos, so man reflects in himself all that he sees and finds in his Universe; the Earth. 
In the Sacred Books, such as the Zohar and the Book of Enoch, we find symbolical representations of the great struggle that goes on between Divine Wisdom, or Nous, and its earthly reflection, also called Psuche, or Psyche; in other words between the Soul and Higher Mind, both in 'Heaven' and on Earth. In Heaven (in other words: the Higher Astral Planes) the Divine Monad, or Ego-Principle, had voluntarily exiled itself therefrom, to descend, for incarnating purposes, to a lower Plane, and thus transform the human animal body of clay into an immortal god. For, as Eliphas Levi states: "The Angels aspire to become Men; for the perfect Man, the Man-God, is above even Angels". 
On Earth there is the same struggle, because no sooner had the Higher Mind (or negative part of the Monad) descended than it was strangled in the coils of Matter. 
"The Light is I", says Pymander. "I am the Nous, I am thy God.....I am the Germ of Thought, the resplendent Word....All that thus sees and hears in thee is the Verbum of the Master; it is the Thought which is God, the Father." It is the Absolute Consciousness behind phenomena, and the only reason why this Consciousness is sometimes called the 'Unconscious', or the 'Subconscious', is because there is no visible element of personality in it, and this transcends human conception. "Man, unable to form a single concept except in terms of empirical phenomena, is powerless from the very constitution of his (outer) being to raise the veil that shrouds the majesty of the Absolute. Only the liberated Spirit is able to faintly realise the nature of the source whence it sprung and whither it must eventually return", says Madam Blavatsky so truly. 
Albert Schwegler, in his 'Handbook of the History of Philosophy', in James Hutchison Sterling's translation (1867), states: "the mergings of the individual in the Universal Consciousness to use a phrase of Fichte's the Finite cannot conceive the infinite, nor can it apply to it its own standard of mental experiences, how can it be said that the Unconscious and the Absolute can have even an instinctive impulse or hope of attaining a clear self-consciousness?" But a Vedantin would never admit this Hegelian idea; and the Occultist would say that it applies perfectly to the awakened Cosmic Divine Mind, the manifestation of the Third Logos on the Third Plane, the Universal Mind already projected into the phenomenal world as the first aspect of the changeless Absolute, but never to the latter. And the Mind of the Logos being of the same Essence as the Higher Mind of Man, the two must blend if Man reaches out to this Spiritual Essence. "Spirit and Matter are but the two primeval effects of the ONE and Secondless", states the ancient Teaching.

The matter-moving Nous, the animating Soul, immanent in every Atom, manifest in Man, latent in the stone, has different degrees of power; and this Pantheistic idea of a general Spirit-Soul pervading all Nature is the oldest of all philosophical notions. Nor was the so-called 'Archaeus' a discovery either of Paracelsus or of his pupil Van Helmont; for it is but another name for Father-Aether, the manifested basis and source of the innumerable phenomena of life localised. The whole series of the numberless speculations of this kind are but variations on the same theme, the keynote of which was struck in primeval revelation. 

The Greek term 'Nous' has the same meaning as 'Mahat' in Sanskrit. From Mind proceeded the Word, Logos; from the Word, Providence (better termed: 'Divine Light'); then from it Virtue and Wisdom in Principalities, Powers, Angels, etc., taught the Basilidians. By these Angels 365 Aeons were created. Amongst the lowest, indeed, and those who made this world, Basilides sets last of all the God of the Jews, affirming he is one of the Angels. The system is the same as that of the Purānas, wherein the Incomprehensible drops a Seed (Hidden Logos), which becomes the Golden Egg (Manifested Logos), from which Brahma is produced (Third Logos). Brahma produces the rest. 
True Esoteric Philosophy, however, speaks neither of 'Creation', nor of 'Evolution', in the sense in which exoteric religions do. All these personified Powers are not evolutions from one another, but so many aspects of the one and sole manifestation of the Absolute All. As Plato says: "Beyond all finite existences and secondary causes; all laws, ideas, and principles, there is an Intelligence or Nous (Mind), the first principle of all principles, the Supreme Idea on which all other ideas are grounded.....the ultimate substance from which all things derive their being and essence, the First and efficient Cause of all the order, and harmony, and beauty and excellency, and Goodness, which pervades the Universe". 
This Mind, or Nous, is called, by way of pre-eminence and excellence, the Supreme Good, "The God', and the 'God over all'. These words apply as Plato himself shows, neither to the 'Creator' nor to the 'Father' of our modern Monotheists, but to the Ideal and Abstract Cause. For, as he says: "This Theos, the God over all, is not the Truth or the intelligence, but the Father of it", and its Primal Cause. That which Plato called 'Mundane Intelligence', or Nous, was called Motion, the One Life, or Jivātmā in ancient India. Only, the Aryan Philosophers never endowed this principle, which, with them is infinite, with the finite 'attribute of thinking', or finite self-consciousness. For how can the Absolute attain this otherwise than simply as an aspect, the highest of which aspects known to Man is human consciousness? 
The quaternary of the intellectual world is T'Agathon (Divine Spirit), Nous (Soul), Psyche (Higher Mind), and Hyle (lower mind); while that of the sensible world of Matter is what Pythagoras meant by the word Kosmos, namely: Fire, Air, Water and Earth (plus Ether and the other two as yet unknown Elements). For, according to Plutarch, the Pythagorean world consisted of a double quaternary, and the four Elements are called by the name of rhizomata, the roots or principles of all mixed bodies. That is to say, the lower Tetraktys is the root of illusion, of the world of Matter; and this is the 'Tetragrammaton' of the Jews, and the "mysterious deity", over which the modern Kabalists make such a fuss! 
According to the early Gnostics, their Science, or Gnosis, was based on a square, the angles of which represented respectively Sige (Silence), Bythos (Depth), Nous (Spiritual Soul or Mind), and Aletheia (Truth). And for them the whole of the Universe, metaphysical as well as material, was contained within, and could be expressed and described by the digits contained in the number 10, the Pythagorean Decad or Tetraktys, which we have discussed before. 
Finally, if we wish to know the real difference between Nous, or Divine Wisdom in all its beauty and glory, and the 'Wisdom' of the lower 'reasoning' mind, we shall find a perfect description of the latter in St. James, Chaper 3: verses 15-16, where it is stated: 
"This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, 
sensual, devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work". 
But true Nous or Wisdom he describes in verse 17 of the same chapter in this wise: 
"But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy". 
And he ends up with the sublime words in verse 18: 
"And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace". 
May this be said of us all. 
With best wishes, 
Your Hidden Master. 
N.B. This lecture should be analysed and studied very deeply. 
