SECRET COMMUNICATION OF THE ORDER 
Dear Disciple, 
"The Centre of Water" 
In Lecture No. 32 of Grade 2, we asked if you could guess what Paracelsus really meant when he calls salt "the centre of water, wherein metals ought to die." We have pleasure in submitting the following excellent interpretation of this subject by one of our Students. Please study it and try to develop it still further, for this will profit you. 
H.M. 
Interpretation of the centre of water 
Paracelsus calls salt "the centre of water, wherein metals ought to die." 
The compound water, H2O with which we are familiar on earth is the terrestrial water, which is but a reflection of the celestial water - the prima materia from which the worlds were made. Without H2O life on this planet cannot be sustained: the grain of wheat by itself is unfruitful. It contains within itself all potencies, but it must fall into the ground and die before it can hand on the Life within. The fructifying power of moisture in union with the seed works the miracle of birth - a "miracle" to us, but a natural law in operation: on this plane a reflection of the union of Isis and Osiris from whom the golden Horus is born: Isis the Mother, the Water, the Electric Fluid which is the basis of all life. 
In Aula Lucis, Thomas Vaughan speaks of the "secret water, which hath in itself all things." He says that it is the Pythagorean cube, "which surpriseth all forms, and retains them prisoners." We call it Nature, Mother Nature sometimes, and her aspects are ever changing, restless as the waters of the sea. Just as the waters of the ocean are salt, and the blood is salt, so is salt the health-giving quality of the great river of life, the crystalline element in which is no darkness at all, no heavy metallic element. This salt is the quintessence of the celestial water; it is the solvent in which the baser elements are transmuted. In the moral realm, the metals are the passions and baser elements of character; by the application of the Divine Solvent the metals die, and Life is regenerated. Regeneration is Transmutation, effected by the Philosopher's Stone, the Elixir of Life. In other words the "fluid" of Life is diffused in the physical life of man, but his work is to make possible the nucleating as it were, of this flowing "water", i.e. the crystallising of the SALT, thus consolidating the "STONE", the "DIAMOND", which is the future vehicle of consciousness of Divine Life in other realms. Naturally then, by Law, the metallic elements are fused, their seminal elements (Salts?) going to their own place, and the lighter ethereal qualities ascending (the Eagles, the Volatile elements). It has been said in Revelation 2:17: "To him that overcometh, I will give a white stone" - in other words, "Salt - the centre of water, wherein metals ought to die." 
A.M.W 
