Dear Disciple, 
SECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Set answer to "The Root of Life" 

In Lecture No.6 of this Grade, we asked you to find the hidden meaning of the following Teaching in one of the most important of the ancient Sacred Books: 
"The Root of Life was in every drop of the Ocean of Immortality, and the Ocean of Radiant Light, which was Fire, and Heat and Motion. Darkness vanished and was no more; it disappeared in its own 19 Essence, the Body of Fire and Water, of Father and Mother." 
Our set answer follows below, which we would ask you to carefully compare with the version you sent to us. 
H.M. 
The Root of Life 
* 
This Teaching is concerned with the manifestation or re-awakening of the Kosmos after a period of sleep, or Pralaya. In it are concealed the origin of Life as well as of consciousness, which scientists will ever seek the sources of in vain in their test-tubes and laboratories! 
The Ocean of Immortality refers in a hidden manner to the Prima Materia, or First Matter, the investigation of which we are gradually leading up to, in this Grade and the next. But this is not any kind of matter as we know it on earth or in the realms above or below. Rather it is the noumenon of that which becomes matter as we know and experience it during the periods of manifestation. For as Hermes tells us, "matter becomes; formerly it was; for matter is the vehicle of becoming. Becoming is the mode of activity of the uncreate deity." The "uncreate deity" being of course, the Father and Mother before their awakening in a new Manvantara or "Day" of manifestation. 
The "Body of Fire and Water, of Father and Mother", here referred to is Darkness, but not darkness as we know it on earth. According to the tenets of Occult Science, Darkness is the one true actuality, the basis and the root of light, without which the latter could never manifest itself, nor even exist. Light is matter, and Darkness pure Spirit. Darkness, in its radical, metaphysical basis, is subjective and absolute light; while the latter in all its seeming 
effulgence and glory, is merely a mass of shadows, as it can never be eternal, and is simply an illusion. 
The essence of darkness being absolute light, Darkness is taken as the appropriate allegorical representation of the condition of the Universe during Pralaya, or the term of absolute rest, or non-being, as it appears to our finite minds. 
The "fire," "heat," and "motion" here spoken of, are, of course, not the fire, heat, and motion of physical science, but rather their underlying abstractions, the noumena, or the ESSENCE of these material manifestations. Here we also find a trinity of principles, the "fire" of the Father allied to the "water" of the Mother, producing “heat” and “motion", or the Son. 
Fire and Water, or Father and Mother, may be taken here to mean the divine Ray and Chaos. "Chaos, from this union with Spirit obtaining sense, shone with pleasure, and thus was produced the Protogonos (the first-born light)," as Hermes also tells us. 
We may note that in Genesis, light is created out of darkness "and darkness was upon the face of the deep" (1:2.) — and not vice versa. “In dot him (in darkness) was life; and the life was the light of men" (John 1:4). This also explains the verse in the Gospel of John that says: "And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehendeth it not." For the "darkness" referred to does not apply to man's spiritual eyesight, but indeed to "Darkness," the absolute ONE ESSENCE, that His comprehendeth not (cannot recognise) transient light, however transcendent to human eyes. 
* 
* 
Dear Disciple, 
ECRET LECTURE OF THE ORDER Set answer to "The Fiery Fish of Life" 

In Lecture No.8 of Grade 2, we asked you to send us your version of the real meaning of the following paragraph from one of the ancient commentaries to the most important Book on the Secret Science: 
"The Mother is the fiery Fish of Life, She scatters her Spawn and the Breath (motion) heats and quickens it. The Grains (of Spawn) are soon attracted to each other and form the Curds in the Ocean (of Space). The larger lumps coalesce and receive new Spawn - in fiery Dots, Triangles and Cubes, which ripen, and at the appointed time some of the Lumps detach themselves and assume spheroidal form, a process which they effect only when not interfered with by the others. After which the Secret Law comes into operation. Motion (Breath) becomes the Whirlwind and sets them into rotation." 
Our set answer follows below, which we would ask you to carefully compare with the version you sent to us. 
H.M. 
The Fiery Fish 
Occultism postulates one Universal Element. In its nature... infinite and deathless... because never born. Though without attributes, and never personally involved in creation... is "That" the one first Cause of which macrocosm and microcosm are the effects. This bare abstraction is Divine Space. Not in the sense of a void but containing within "Itself" the all of life. It is this for ever concealed abstraction, out of which emerges a more coalesced abstraction, which is the causal reality... or... the noumenon of which Cosmic Substance is the phenomenon. 
Co-existent with this Element is the eternal Ceaseless Breath... functioning as eternal abstract motion. This fundamental Parent Element puts forth from itself a threefold agency. Spirit functioning as Fire, the effect of which is Light... or...Intelligence... or Universal Mind. And... a transformable element of Fire... moisture or water. These three agents of the ever concealed Deity form the first Trinity (Motion, Fire and Moisture) or working garment of which all other Trinities are a lower aspect... from a Kosmos right down to an atom. 
The Mother is the Fiery Fish of Life. Presents a trinity also. 
MOTHER: the negative condition, abstract feminine nature. 
FIERY: Spirit functioning as magical Fire Element within the Mother or receptive feminine condition. 
FISH:Implying moisture or water. 

The Fire as the male element within the Mother fecundates her own receptive feminine condition by a process of self-generation by expansion. She throws off from herself...fecundated germs identical with her own nature and powers or... scatters her spawn. 
The Fire germs are the sparks of the Mother-Father which the Breath - Motion - fans and quickens into flames. They are now of a positive-negative nature, allowing attraction and repulsion. This attraction allows of combination or... coalescing into lumps and curds, postulating the transformation from a fluidic state into a firmer consistency. 
Now these Fire germs are the abstract Cause of the Universe and the countless Solar Systems within it. These Eternal Abstract Germs repeat the parent process and receive new spawn. 
Fiery Dots, Triangles and Cubes present a more tangible, though still abstract condition, of the fundamental Trinity: Motion, Fire, Moisture or water. Now since there is only One Element Divine Space - from which all emerges, this Trinity is not three but One. One in substance, three only in manifestation. There is only One substance allowing of no extraneous additions. These Three can never be anything but various aspects or presented modifications of That One Eternal Element Space or Concealed Deity. So Fiery Dots could be the concealed Logoi... the Triangles the abstract Logos... the Cubes, the four-fold condition of matter through which the three-fold Logos works. Presenting from the Triangle once removed from the Dot... the concealed Deity... the Sevenfold Garment which determines the various realms of being or... the Dot- the Sun behind the Sun. The visible Sun - the Triangle or the Manifesting Logos... the Cube - the visible Universe according to the Law of 'as above, so below.' 
By detachment, at the appointed time, some assume spheroidal form, being below this nucleus Triad, representative of the first element as an adoption by Illusion. A garment or form assumed for evolutionary processes. 
Time... suggests Law. A process effected only when not interfered with by others. Suggests a state of privation leading to self-accumulation of the fundamental substance, or a ripening process. The Secret Law, or the Law of Periodicity, which form determines, in the sense that that which is born, must also die. The dual operation dependant upon that Be-ness which is not manifested and Being which assumes form and is therefore visible. 
The statements for interpretation are an esoteric presentation, relative to Cosmic Creation, or formation, from the One Self-existing Element. But because of the Law of 'as above, so below', they are that one truth reflected from the first Dot of differentiation from the first Abstraction, and by virtue of repeated process... the same one Truth underlying all form. These fiery formless Breaths are the abstract potentialities of visible Gods and Systems. Abstraction on this Plane, being the one unchanging reality. 
So the Fiery formless Breath in us is "God", and the God of our own individual Ray. An intelligent, all knowing, all powerful self-existent radiant Essence. 
We see ourselves as Spawn or children of the Hidden Logos of our Kosmos, or sparks, the Breath of pilgrimship will fan into flames, Fires and radiant Suns, a vision of unfolding splendour, our Soul in the unchanging Absolute, our manifestation an eternal Becoming. 

